Experimental
Chemical
The bamboo (Phyllostachys pubescens)-based industrial by-product used in the experiments was obtained from the Yunnan province of China. 1-Ethyl-3-methylimidazolium-bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide (EMIM TFSI) and 1-butyl-1-methylpyrrolidinium-bis(trifluoromethylsulfony)imide (BMPY TFSI) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. Potassium hydroxide, N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP) and all others reagents were purchased from Beijing Chemical Works, unless otherwise specified, and were used without further purification.
Synthesis of the material
2.0 g of bamboo-based industrial by-product was uniformly dispersed in 40 mL of distilled water containing 0.5 mL of sulfuric acid using ultrasound. The dispersion was placed in a 100 mL stainless steel autoclave and was heated up to 200 °C for 12 h and then allowed to cool to room temperature. The resulting solid product (hydrochar) was recovered by filtration, washed with distilled water and dried overnight at 80 °C. The hydrochar was activated using KOH at a mass ratio of 1 : 1 (hydrochar–KOH) mixed in an agate mortar and heated at 800 °C in a horizontal tubular oven for 1 h under argon flow, with a heating rate of 5 °C min−1. Finally, the samples were sufficiently washed with 10 vol% acetic acid solution to remove the residual inorganic impurities and then plenty of distilled water, followed by drying in an oven at 120 °C for 5 h and annealing at 800 °C for 1 h under vacuum. In order to demonstrate the effect of the vacuum annealing, control samples without the annealing (800 °C in vacuum) process and annealing at 1000 °C to remove the oxygen groups from the carbon surface were prepared, with other procedures as same as that of BHNC. To examine the effect of hydrothermal treatment on the morphology and porous structure of the samples, another control sample was synthesized by direct pyrolysis of the bamboo-based industrial by-product at 800 °C for 2 h before the activation process.
Structural characterization
The composition of the bamboo-based industrial by-product was determined using a high-performance anion exchange chromatography (HPAEC) system (ICS-3000, Dionex). The morphologies and microstructures of the samples were observed using field emission scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM, JSM-7500F), transmission electron microscopy (TEM, JEM-2100) and high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HR-TEM, JEM-2100F). Powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns were determined using an X-ray diffractometer (X-6000) with Cu Kα radiation (λ = 1.5406 Å). Raman spectroscopy was performed using a microscopic confocal Raman spectrometer (LabRAM HR800) at a laser wavelength of 514 nm. The electrical conductivity of the BHNC powders was determined using a four-point probe method (Jandel RM3) by pressing the powders at a pressure of 10 MPa. The porous texture characters of the samples were measured using nitrogen sorption isotherms at 77 K (Micromeritics ASAP 2010), and the specific surface area and pore size distributions were analyzed using the Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) method and the Non-Local Density Functional Theory (NLDFT) model, using the silt model. The surface elemental compositions were determined using X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS, Escalab 250) and infrared spectroscopy (IR, iN10MX).
Electrochemical measurements in 6 M KOH
The aqueous supercapacitor performance was tested in 6 M KOH in a three-electrode configuration and two-electrode symmetric cell. The work electrode was prepared such that a slurry of 90% BHNC, 5% conducting carbon (Super-P) and 5% binder (PVDF) in NMP was pressed onto a nickel foam at 15 MPa and then dried at 100 °C overnight in a vacuum oven with a loading of about 2 mg cm−2. Platinum foil and an Ag/AgCl electrode were used as the counter and reference electrode in the three-electrode configuration, respectively. Cyclic voltammetry (CV) and galvanostatic charge–discharge curves were obtained using a CHI660D electrochemical workstation. The specific capacitance is calculated from It/mΔE, based on the charge–discharge curves in the three-electrode configuration, where I (A) is the discharge current, t (s) is the discharge time, m (g) is the mass of active electrode material, and ΔE (V) is the potential window. For the two-electrode symmetric supercapacitors, the devices were assembled such that two electrodes were separated by a porous polypropylene membrane soaked in 6 M KOH in CR2025-type coin cells. A CT2001E Battery Program Controlling Test System was used to measure the galvanostatic charge–discharge and the specific capacitance C was calculated from 2It/mΔE, where m (g) is the weight of active material of one electrode.
Electrochemical measurements in neat EMIM TFSI
To measure the non-aqueous symmetric supercapacitor performance in a neat ionic liquid of EMIM TFSI as the electrolyte, the electrodes were prepared by pressing the above slurry containing the BHNC sample onto a conducting carbon substrate with a loading of about 5 mg cm−2. Two electrodes were separated by a porous polypropylene membrane soaked in neat EMIM TFSI in CR2025-type coin cells. The CV curves were obtained using a CHI660D electrochemical workstation and the galvanostatic charge–discharge was measured using a CT2001E Battery Program Controlling Test System over a voltage window of 3.5 V tested at 60 °C. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) was performed at an open-circuit potential with a perturbation amplitude of 5 mV. For the symmetrical supercapacitors, the energy density E (W h kg−1) was calculated from CV2/(8 × 3.6) and the power density P (W kg−1) was calculated from E/t, where V (V) is the discharge voltage and t (h) is the discharge time.
