Experimental
Synthesis of PANI/graphene composite powders
The PANI/graphene composite powders were synthesized by in situ polymerization of aniline with ammonium peroxydisulfate (APS) as the oxidant2,44 in the presence of graphene (graphene was synthesized by the CVD method with a diameter of ∼10–50 μm (ref. 45)). In a typical synthetic procedure, a solution of 5 mL of 1 M HCl containing different masses of graphene was sonicated at room temperature for 2 h. And then 0.25 mL aniline was added to form an aniline/graphene/HCl suspension by stirring for 0.5 h. After that, 0.5 g of APS in 2 mL 1 M HCl solution was added dropwise to the well-stirred suspension within 20 min. The polymerization reaction was carried out at 0 °C by stirring for 6 h in an ice bath. The products were filtered and washed with 1 M HCl, deionized water and ethanol sequentially. Next, the as-prepared products were added into 100 mL 0.1 M ammonia solution in order to achieve deprotonation by stirring for 24 h. Finally, composite powders composed of emeraldine-based polyaniline and graphene were filtered and washed with 0.1 M ammonia, deionized water and ethanol sequentially, followed by drying in a vacuum desiccator at 60 °C for 48 h. The PANI powders were synthesized by the same process described above without adding graphene into 1 M HCl before polymerization.
Fabrication of PANI/graphene composite films
The as-prepared PANI/graphene composite powders by in situ polymerization were doped with camphorsulfonic acid (CSA) by solid state grinding according to a PANI : CSA mole ratio of 2 : 1 (the optimal doping amount46) and then dissolved into m-cresol solution under stirring and sonication each for 3 h at room temperature sequentially. PANI/graphene composite films were prepared by dropping the mixed solution on glass substrates and dried at 40 °C in the air. The graphene contents were identified to be 10 wt%, 26 wt% and 48 wt% by the initial weight ratio of graphene, PANI/graphene composites and CSA. The obtained products were denoted as PANI/GP-P.
As a comparison, PANI/graphene composite films were also prepared by a direct solution mixing method as described in our previous report.42 In that procedure, the as-prepared pure PANI were doped with camphorsulfonic acid (CSA) by solid state grinding according to a PANI : CSA mole ratio of 2 : 1 and then directly mixed with graphene in the m-cresol solvent to prepare composite films. The mixed solution was stirred and sonicated each for 3 h at room temperature sequentially, and then dropped on glass substrates and dried at 40 °C in air. The obtained films were denoted as PANI/GP-M.
Characterization
The morphology of synthesized films was characterized by scanning electron microscopy (FEI Magellan 400) and transmission electron microscopy (JEM-2100F). UV-Vis absorption spectrum analysis of the films was carried out on a Perkin-Elmer UV-Vis spectrophotometer (Lambda 950, Waltham, MA). Raman spectra measurements were carried out on a Raman spectrometer (JY LabRam-1B, λexc = 632.8 nm). FT-IR spectra of films were recorded on a Nicolet 7000-C (Thermal Scientific Co., USA). X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) spectra were obtained on an ESCALAB 250, Thermo Scientific Ltd with a 320 mm diameter spot of monochromated aluminum Kα X-rays at 1486.6 eV under ultrahigh-vacuum conditions. The C1s signal was used to correct the charge effects. The thickness of the films was measured using a Dektak profilometer. The electrical conductivity and Seebeck coefficient were measured along the in-plane direction at room temperature following the methods previously reported.47
