2.Experimental
2.1.Materials
Polyvinyl alcohol (PVA, Aladdin Co., China, molecular weight 44.05 MW, alcoholysis: 99.8–100%), sulfuric acid (H2SO4, Beijing north fine chemicals co., China), indigo carmine (IC, Tianjin Kaixin Chemical industry co., China), and activated carbon (AC, Shanghai Sino Tech Investment Management Co., China) were purchased. All materials were commercially available and employed without further purification.
2.2.Preparation of gel polymer electrolyte
A series of PVA–H2SO4–IC gel polymers were obtained using a simple solution-mixing/casting method.26 Typically, the synthesis procedure for PVA–H2SO4–IC gels with different contents of IC is as follows: first, 1 g PVA was dissolved in 10 mL of deionized water with agitation at 80 °C for 2 h to obtain a clear solution. Then, 10 mL of aqueous solution containing H2SO4 (1.0 g) and IC (0–0.14 g) was added to the above solution to form a homogeneous viscous mixture under constant stirring. Finally, this homogeneous viscous solution was poured into a 90 mm plastic petri dish to be frozen at −25 °C for 12 h and thawed at room temperature for 12 h. The freeze–thaw cycles were repeated 2 times to obtain the PVA–H2SO4–IC gel polymer.
For comparison purpose, the gel polymer PVA–H2SO4 without IC was also prepared under the same conditions.
2.3.Preparation of activated carbon electrodes and fabrication of solid state supercapacitors
The activated carbon (AC) electrode was prepared as follows: initially, the activated carbon (16 mg, 80%), acetylene black (2 mg, 10%) and polytetrafluoroethylene (2 mg, 10%) were mixed and dispersed in 0.4 mL of N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP) to produce a homogeneous slurry.31 Then, the resultant slurry was coated on the stainless steel net (thickness = 0.06 mm) with an area of 1.5 cm2. After being dried at 60 °C for 24 h, the AC electrodes for supercapacitors were obtained and the mediator material loading was (including carbon black and polytetrafluoroethylene) 3 mg on each electrode.
The fabrication details of solid state supercapacitors are shown in Fig. 1. The prepared gel electrolyte was coated on the surface of the electrodes and assembled together by face-to-face. The two carbon papers with the electrode material were used as current collectors and the polymer gel electrolytes were used both as a separator and electrolyte.
Schematic diagram of a fabricated supercapacitor (black line, blue circle and yellow circle correspond to the PVA polymer, IC molecule and H2SO4 molecule).
2.4.Characterization
The mechanical performance of the redox mediated gel polymer was tested via bending, compressing and stretching. The gel polymer membrane was cut into a ribbon of 0.8 cm width and 3.0 cm length and the deformation was caused under appropriate forces.
The electrochemical properties of the supercapacitor were studied through cyclic voltammetry (CV) with a potential of 0–1 V and a galvanostatic charge–discharge (GCD) test with a potential of 0–1 V at different current densities from 0.3 to 2 A g−1. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) was carried out at an open circuit potential (OCP) by applying AC potential with a 5 mV amplitude in the frequency range of 0.1 Hz to 105 Hz. Moreover, the cycle life was tested at a current density of 1 A g−1 for 3000 cycles. For comparison, the CV and GCD of the three-electrode system based on 1 mol L−1 H2SO4 containing 0.1 g of IC were also studied. All the above electrochemical studies were carried out at room temperature using an electrochemical workstation system (CHI 660D, Chenghua, Shanghai, China).
