Experimental methods
Materials
Polyvinyl alcohols with the molecular weight of 130 000 g mol−1 and with a degree of hydrolysis of 0.99 were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich and used as received. Halloysite nanotubes (HNTs) were obtained from Guangzhou New Rare Metallurgical Chemical Industry Co. Ltd, Guangzhou, China, and purified on the basis of our previous work.45 Ionic liquids of 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate (BMIMBF4) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich and used as received. Water was distilled and deionized.
Preparation of liquid crystalline PVA/HNTs aqueous dispersions
First, homogeneous PVA solutions were prepared by the addition of 10, 9, 8, 7, and 6 g of PVA into 90 g of water in five flasks with stirring at 60 °C for 4 h. Then, 0, 1, 2, 3, and 4 g of HNTs were added into the above five flasks and stirred for another 2 h at 60 °C, and then sonicated (40 kHz, 100 W) for 1 h to obtain homogeneous dispersions. Finally, liquid crystalline 10 wt% PVA/HNTs aqueous dispersions containing 0, 1, 2, 3, and 4 wt% of HNTs were obtained.
Preparation of PVA/HNTs aerogel
3 g of the above dispersions were then injected into plastic vials having a diameter of 20 mm and length of 50 mm. The plastic tube was dipped at a constant rate of 6 mm min−1 into a cold bath maintained at a constant temperature of −196 °C (liquid nitrogen). The homogeneous dispersion was frozen in a unidirectional way from the bottom to the top. The visual observation of the ice front progress provided a more realistic measurement of the freezing rate. The average ice front velocity was estimated by measuring the time of freezing and dividing it by the length of the frozen sample. Note that the solidified PVA/HNTs/water systems will be changed into liquid crystalline hydrogel by thawing (freezing and thawing method). The frozen samples were freeze-dried (Freeze Dryer, FD-1, Detianyou, China) for 48 h at −59 °C. Finally, the PVA/HNTs nanocomposite aerogels containing 0, 10, 20, 30, and 40 wt% of HNTs were obtained.
Preparation of PVA/HNTs nanocomposite polymer electrolytes based on ILs
The abovementioned aerogels were imbibed with the ionic liquids by immersing them in an excess of the liquid in a glass vessel, and then they were placed in a vacuum oven at a constant temperature of 60 °C for 24 h (vacuum degassing method). The obtained ILs-based NCPE were patted dry with a paper towel. Weight samples were measured before and after, and the solvent weight uptake was quantified based on the weight of the dry aerogel sample. The composition of the ILs-based NCPE is shown in Table 1 (see ESI).
Characterization
Optical micrographs were obtained using a BX51 Olympus polarized optical microscope (Olympus, Japan) equipped with an Olympus DP72 CCD camera and a Linkam THMSE600 hot stage (Linkam, UK). Ionic conductivities of the PVA/HNTs/ILs systems were measured using a Zahner IM6e electrochemical workstation (Zahner, Germany) over the frequency range from 1 Hz to 500 kHz at an AC oscillation of 10 mV. The measurements of the samples, having a diameter of 4 mm and thickness of 2 mm, were carried out in a cell, which consisted of a Teflon spacer sandwiched between two platinum coated stainless steel electrodes. The cell constant was determined using a 0.01 M KCl aqueous solution at 25 °C as the reference. Ionic conductivities were calculated from the bulk resistances obtained from the impedance spectra. The minimum in the Nyquist plot of the negative imaginary part of the impedance versus the real part of the impedance was taken as the sample resistance, R. The ionic conductivity, σ, was calculated as d/(RS), where d and S are the thickness and area of the sample, respectively. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of the samples were obtained on a JEOL SEM 6700 operating at 5 kV, and the ILs-based NCPE samples were first surface treated and then coated with platinum before the SEM observations. Mechanical properties were studied on a WDT-10 tensile tester (Shenzhen Kaiqiangli Testing Instrument CO., LTD) to measure the compression modulus of the ILs-based NCPE both perpendicular and parallel to the freezing direction. The cube samples with a length of 10 mm were loaded in a compression mode with a rate of 0.5 mm min−1. The samples were compressed into 50% of their original thickness at room temperature. Dynamic mechanical properties of the NCPE were studied using a dynamic mechanical analyzer (DMA-8000, Perkin Elmer Co, USA). The sample size was 18 × 6 × 2 mm3. Heating rate was 2 °C min−1 and the frequency was 1 Hz. The range of testing temperatures was from 25 to 200 °C. Thermal analysis of the NCPE was performed using a Perkin Elmer TGA 6 (Perkin Elmer Instruments, USA). The temperature ranged from 50 to 750 °C with a heating rate of 10 °C min−1 under nitrogen.
