Results and discussion
The PXRD patterns of TpBpy-ST indicate a highly intense peak at 2θ = 3.6° (∼30 000 cps; cps = counts per second) corresponding to the 100 plane reflections (Fig. 2a), with minor peaks at 6.0, 6.9, 9.2, 12.1, 12.5, 15.2, and 25.1–28.6°. The π–π stacking distance between the COF layers was calculated to be 3.5 Å using the d spacing between the (001) planes (25.1–28.6°). A possible 2D structure was generated using Crystal 09 software. The experimental PXRD pattern matches well with the simulated pattern of the eclipsed stacking model (Fig. S1). Hence, we propose a structure close to the hexagonal P6/m space group (a = b = 29.3 Å, c = 3.5 Å, α = β = 90°, γ = 120°) for TpBpy-ST(Fig. S4 and Table S2). An excellent agreement between the experimental and simulated eclipsed PXRD patterns was confirmed from Pawley refinement (Rp = 2.5%, Rwp = 4.5%) (Fig. S2). PXRD peak positions of TpBpy-MC were found to be similar to those of the TpBpy-ST. But the first peak intensity (∼5000 cps) of the plane (100) is less intense than that of TpBpy-ST. This could be attributed to the random displacement of the 2D COF layers due to the constant mechanical force applied during the synthesis. This eventually results in the formation of a partially eclipsed structure with poorly distributed accessible pores. As a result, the reflections corresponding to the (100) plane get diffused and thus weaken the peak intensity. The broad peak at higher 2θ (∼26°) is mainly due to the π–π stacking between the COF layers which corresponds to the (001) plane (Fig. 2a, S1 and S3).8d The FT-IR peaks of TpBpy-ST and TpBpy-MC match well with that of the monomer (2E,4E,6E)-2,4,6-tris (([2,2′-bipyridin] 5-yl-amino)methylene)cyclohexane-1,3,5-trione. The FT-IR spectra rule out the presence of minor traces of the starting materials with the disappearance of N–H stretching bands (3112–3317 cm−1) of Bpy and CO stretching frequency (1637 cm−1) of Tp (Fig. S5). In addition, strong peaks corresponding to the stretching frequency of the keto-form were observed at 1607 (CO) and 1579 (CC) cm−1, similar to that of the monomer (Fig. S6). The CO peaks (1609 cm−1) of TpBpy-ST get merged with the CC stretching band (1579 cm−1). The 13C CP-MAS solid state NMR of both TpBpy-ST and TpBpy-MC shows carbonyl (CO) carbon signals at δ 182.8 and 181.5 ppm, respectively, similar to the (CO) carbon signal of the monomer at δ 181.2 ppm (Fig. S7). The SEM and TEM images indicate that TpBpy-ST crystallizes in an interwoven thread-like morphology with aggregation of a large number of individual crystallites bearing an average width of 100–300 nm (Fig. 2e and g, S8 and S10). In contrast, TpBpy-MC shows a predominant sheet-like morphology with reduced dimensions which is a common characteristic of the mechanochemically delaminated COF crystallites (Fig. 2f and h, S9 and S11).8d,9
(a) Comparison of the experimental PXRD pattern of TpBpy-MC (blue) and TpBpy-ST (black) with the simulated eclipsed (red) and staggered (green) forms; inset image showing the stacking diagram of TpBpy; (b) the N2 uptake isotherms of TpBpy-ST (red) and TpBpy-MC (blue); (c) eclipsed stacking model of TpBpy; (d) staggered stacking model of TpBpy; (e) and (f) correspond to the TEM images of TpBpy-ST and TpBpy-MC (scale bar represents 100 nm); (g) and (h) SEM images of TpBpy-ST and TpBpy-MC (scale bar represents 400 nm).
Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) of the activated TpBpy-ST and TpBpy-MC shows high thermal stability up to 350 °C, with a gradual weight loss of 40 and 30%, respectively, after 360 °C due to the decomposition of the respective frameworks (Fig. S12 and S13). The permanent porosity of TpBpy-ST was evaluated by using N2 adsorption isotherms at 77 K, which shows a reversible type-IV adsorption isotherm. The surface area of the activated COFs calculated using the BET model was found to be 1746 and 293 m2 g−1, respectively, for TpBpy-ST and TpBpy-MC (Fig. 2b, S14, S16). The decrease in the surface area of TpBpy-MC compared to its solvothermal counterpart is presumably due to its sheet-like morphology, unlike the thread-like morphology of TpBpy-ST. This consequently blocks the long range pore formation in TpBpy-MC, rendering N2 adsorption possible only in the empty accessible pores of the framework. Thus, the diffused stacking peak intensity, as observed from the PXRD spectral study and the low surface area of TpBpy-MC, as inferred from the BET study is a clear reflection of the partial loss in the ordering of the 2D sheets. These COFs show moderate H2, CO2 and water uptake (Fig. S18 to S22). The pore size distribution of TpBpy-ST and TpBpy-MC shows a narrow pore size distribution between the ranges of 2.1 and 1.4 nm, respectively (Fig. S15 and S17).9 The chemical stability of TpBpy-ST and TpBpy-MC was evaluated by immersing these COFs in water; strong mineral acids namely 9 N HCl and 3 M H3PO4 and a strong base namely 3 N NaOH. Interestingly, both COFs remain stable and crystalline, despite such harsh treatment. The FT-IR spectra, PXRD, N2 adsorption isotherms and SEM of the COFs remain almost unchanged even after 7 days of water and acid treatment. They also exhibit considerable base stability for more than 7 days of treatment with near retention of their molecular crystallinity (Fig. S23 to S27). The observable ∼20% loss in the surface area after the base treatment could be mainly attributed to the consequent loss of the intra-molecular H bonding which weakens the framework rigidity and stability. The material stability was further checked with increasing phosphoric acid concentrations. It was found that both TpBpy-ST and TpBpy-MC retained their structural integrity even after treatment with 6 M and 12 M H3PO4 for 7 days each (Fig. S28 to S30).
Bipyridine (Bpy) moieties have the potential to abstract protons from mineral acids and form corresponding bipyridinium salts.12 For example, the protonation of 2,2′-bipyridine-5,5′-diamine by phosphoric acid leads to a different protonated state of the bipyridine moiety along with the phosphate counter anions (Fig. 3a). Interestingly, we could crystallize and solve the corresponding crystal structures of both the monoprotonated 2,2′-bipyridinium-5-amino-5′-ammonium bis-dihydrogen phosphate species (involving only one pyridine N of the Bpy unit and another with free amine N) as well as doubly protonated Bpy species 2,2′-bipyridinium-5,5′-diamino hydrogen phosphate monohydrate (involving both the pyridinic N) (Fig. S31 and S32). The degree of protonation of the Bpy unit has been evaluated by dissolving 2,2′-bipyridine-5,5′-diamine in aqueous H3PO4 followed by crystallization via slow evaporation of the mother liquor. The mono-protonated structure consists of intramolecular hydrogen bonding between the protonated pyridine unit and the dihydrogen phosphate [H2PO4−] moieties [N–H⋯O9; D = 2.816(2) Å, d = 2.023(2) Å, θ = 153.5°] (Table S3), that are hydrogen bonded among themselves [O–H⋯O; 2.652(3) Å, 1.844(2) Å, 160.7°]. On the other hand, the doubly protonated species includes hydrogen bonded water molecules [N–H⋯O; 2.843(3) Å, 2.010(4) Å, 159.5°] within the crystal structure, which connect the protonated pyridinic N and monohydrogen phosphate [HPO42−] [O–H⋯O; 2.701(5) Å, 1.884(4) Å, 153.5°] (Table S4). The protonation of the Bpy monomer by H3PO4 can also be well correlated with the changes in the solution state UV spectra (increasing the intensity of peak at 270 nm and the diminished intensity of the peak at 418 nm) (Fig. 3e and S33). This lays a strong foundation for easy modulation and evaluation of the protonation step. Furthermore, the protonation at the primary amine site is less likely due to the unavailability of the same in the plain COF backbone. The 31P CP-SSNMR solid state NMR spectra of both activated PA@TpBpy-ST and PA@TpBpy-MC show two distinctive signals at δ 0.0 and −14.6 ppm. The peak at δ 0.0 ppm is due to the orthophosphoric acid (H3PO4) and δ −14.6 ppm is assigned to the condensation products of phosphoric acid, maybe dimers or oligomers.13a,b It is worth noting that, unlike the activated samples, the 31P CP-SSNMR spectra of the non-activated ones show only one signal at 0.0 ppm, corresponding to the loaded H3PO4 (Fig. S35), thereby indicating the condensation of the phosphoric acid on thermal activation. Such loaded species have close resemblance with the H3PO4 doped polybenzimidazole (PBI) membranes, (H3PO4@PBI),13 one of the currently employed benchmark high temperature solid state electrolytes in PEMFCs. We envisage that both the mono protonated as well as the doubly protonated species will prevail within the TpBpy COF backbone upon H3PO4 loading, which strongly motivated us to perform the loading experiment involving both TpBpy-ST and TpBpy-MC. In solid state COFs, proton conductivity is defined by σ = ∑nqμ; where n, q and μ are the number, charge and mobility of the carrier molecules, respectively. H3PO4 has a high proton concentration, low volatility (&gt;158 °C), high mobility and conductivity (ca. 10−1 S cm−1). The H3PO4 loading in TpBpy-ST and TpBpy-MC was achieved by simply immersing the evacuated COF materials in 12 M H3PO4 for 2 h. Further washing with copious amounts of water (100 mL × 2) followed by overnight activation at 353 K under dynamic vacuum lead to H3PO4 loaded TpBpy-ST and TpBpy-MC, henceforth denoted as PA@TpBpy-ST and PA@TpBpy-MC, respectively. It is noteworthy that the PXRD, FT-IR and 13C SSNMR spectra of the COF samples filtered from the 12 M H3PO4 solutions show all the characteristic peaks of the parent COFs with a certain degree of broadening (Fig. S36 to S43), which demonstrates the architectural stability of the COF backbone. During this treatment, the COF pores get eventually filled by the incoming guest molecules. This in turn reduces the exposure of the 100 planes for X-ray diffraction thereby decreasing the corresponding peak intensity after acid treatment. The H3PO4 loading phenomenon is in accordance with the partial decrease in porosity as measured from N2 adsorption isotherm studies (80 m2 g−1), which alludes to the fact that the H3PO4 predominantly blocks the pores of the framework during the course of its loading in both TpBpy-ST and TpBpy-MC. The decrease in porosity upon 12 M H3PO4 doping may be advantageous to overcome hydrogen fuel crossover, while high stability with retention of intrinsic properties ensures its sustainability under fuel cell operating conditions as discussed later on. Interestingly, TpBpy-ST shows a greater weight loss step (∼15 wt%) than TpBpy-MC (∼11 wt%), justified from the fact that the former has higher porosity which could therefore accommodate more water and acid molecules comparatively. The reproducibility of the acid loading was confirmed by a TGA study on multiple batches (Fig. S12 and S13). In order to validate the concept of phosphoric acid loading, we tried to evacuate the loaded H3PO4 molecules out of the PA@TpBpy-ST pores. As expected the 100-plane intensity increased while the 001 plane intensity decreased on evacuating the H3PO4 molecules out of its pores. Interestingly the surface area increased up to 750 m2 g−1. However, complete restoration of the framework porosity cannot be expected due to the polymerization of phosphoric acid units within the COF framework.
(a) Synthetic scheme of mono protonated bipyridine and doubly protonated bipyridine forms of PA@Bpy on the loading of 12 M H3PO4; (b) synthesis of PA@TpBpy-ST or PA@TpBpy-MC by loading 12 M H3PO4 in TpBpy-ST or TpBpy-MC; (c and d) correspond to the variable temperature proton conductivity data of PA@TpBpy-ST and PA@TpBpy-MC; (e) changes in the UV-vis spectra of the monomer with increasing concentration of H3PO4; (f, g) Arrhenius plot of PA@TpBpy-ST and PA@TpBpy-MC; (h) 31P CP-SSNMR of activated PA@TpBpy-ST and PA@TpBpy-MC.
The proton conductivities of TpBpy-ST, TpBpy-MC, PA@TpBpy-ST and PA@TpBpy-MC were measured by a quasi-four-probe method, using the Solartron 1286 Electrochemical Interface equipped with a Frequency Response Analyser. The conductivities were determined from the semicircles in the Nyquist plots, wherein the high frequency intercept can be ascribed to the bulk resistance generated from the materials. As expected, both TpBpy-ST and TpBpy-MC as such do not exhibit any notable proton conduction which signifies that the parent COF backbones act as mere supports and are devoid of any proton carriers. The temperature dependent proton conducting ability of PA@TpBpy-ST and PA@TpBpy-MC was studied from 233 to 393 K. The conductivity was found to improve with the increase in temperature (Fig. 3c and d and S44). A maximum proton conductivity of 1.98 × 10−3 and 2.5 × 10−3 S cm−1 was measured at 393 K for PA@TpBpy-ST and PA@TpBpy-MC, respectively (Fig. 3c and d). The proton conductivity of PA@TpBpy-ST is comparable with those of its MOF counterparts i.e. PA@MIL-101 (1.3 × 10−3 S cm−1 at 120 °C 0% RH),14 while being two orders of magnitude higher than that previously reported for PA@Tp-Azo (6.7 × 10−5 S cm−1 at 120 °C, 0% RH),11 which we believe, to the best of our knowledge, is the only COF evidenced as a proton conductor to date. It is to be noted that the values are higher than those of the recently reported imidazole impregnated porous organic polymers, Im@Td-PNDI 1 (9.04 × 10−5 S cm−1) and Im@Td-PPI 2 (3.49 × 10−4 S cm−1).15 The activation energy value was calculated to be 0.12 and 0.11 eV for PA@TpBpy-ST and PA@TpBpy-MC, respectively (Fig. S45), which is similar to that of the previously reported PA@TpAzo (0.11 eV) indicating the Grotthuss proton hopping mechanism operating in both cases.16 Clearly, as evident from the preliminary studies, both PA@TpBpy-ST and PA@TpBpy-MC show an almost similar proton conductivity ability under similar conditions although they could be observed to differ in terms of the morphology, the surface area and the degree of crystallinity. However, they are similar in terms of their chemical structure and composition (as confirmed from their PXRD peak positions, FT-IR spectra and solid state NMR spectra). Both TpBpy-ST and TpBpy-MC have bipyridine units in their backbone that are equally capable of immobilizing the phosphoric acid (PA) moieties via hydrogen bonding on their acidification (as evident from the crystal structure of Bpy-H2PO4). Conspicuous by this structural similarity and comparable activation energy, we believe that the proton hopping possibly occurs by the structural diffusion of protons via phosphoric units, hydrogen bonded to the bipyridine site in both PA@TpBpy-ST and PA@TpBpy-MC. Thus we believe that this structural similarity confers a similar proton conducting ability to both PA@TpBpy-ST and PA@TpBpy-MC.
Encouraged by the high proton conductivity of TpBpy COFs, we have validated the concept of utilizing such materials as solid-state electrolytes for PEFMCs under H2/O2 fuel cell operating conditions (Fig. 5 and S46). Initially ∼250 mg of PA@TpBpy-ST powder was pressed into pellets of thickness (∼850 μm) and sandwiched between two Pt–C gas diffusion electrodes (loading of 1 mg Pt per cm2) to fabricate a 2 × 2 cm2 MEA (Membrane Electrode Assembly), performed using a standard PEFMC protocol.17 D.C. measurements were carried out on the assembled MEA using dry H2 and O2 gases as reactants that were passed into the fuel cell assembly at a controlled flow rate (25–30 sccm). A preliminary test carried out to optimize the flow rate of the reactant gases H2 and O2 indicated that, although the OCV initially increased on increasing the flow rate (up to a maximum of 80 sccm), the OCV lifetime was detrimentally affected, due to the mechanical breakdown of the pellet thereafter. Thus the lifetime test of OCV was performed at 50 sccm at both the anode and cathode in order to maximize the OCV lifetime (Fig. S52). The MEA fabricated using the solvothermally synthesized COF pellets PA@TpBpy-ST showed a starting OCV of 0.66 ± 0.02 V at 50 °C. However, the OCV was constant for ∼1.2 h and began to drop thereafter. To check the reproducibility, a new MEA was fabricated using a different PA@TpBpy-ST pellet (of a different batch). Interestingly, the OCV was found to be very close to that of the first one (i.e. 0.67 ± 0.02 V at 50 °C), which continued to remain stable up to ∼1.2 h before decreasing abruptly to ∼0.30 V after that (Fig. S49). On the other hand, the MEA fabricated using mechanochemically synthesized PA@TpBpy-MC pellets showed a satisfying OCV of 0.86 ± 0.02 V at 30 °C that increased to a maximum of 0.90 V, stable for about 2.5 h on further increasing the temperature to 50 °C, on thermal activation of the Pt catalyst (Fig. 4b and S47). For better clarity, SEM imaging of the pellets used for the proton conduction was performed. The cross-section of the COF pellets indicated compact packing of the material in the case of mechanically synthesized PA@TpBpy-MC and a coarse nature in the case of solvothermally synthesized PA@TpBpy-ST pellets (Fig. 4 and S50). The PXRD and IR spectra of the used-pellet matched very well with those of the fresh sample (PA@TpBpy-ST and PA@TpBpy-MC), which confirmed the chemical intactness of the material (Fig. S51). Thus the drastic drop in the OCV in the case of solvothermally synthesized COF pellets could be attributed to the detrimental effect of the highly porous nature of the material that resulted in an easy mechanical breakdown of the pellet. This facilitated an easy fuel crossover across the pellet separating the two Pt electrodes, in turn shorting the fuel cell circuit. The concentration of H2 gas at the cathode, resulting from the fuel leak, was evaluated by studying the in situ Linear Sweep Voltammogram (LSV) profile of the PA@TpBpy-ST constituted single cell (Fig. S48). The potential of the cathode was then linearly scanned from its Open Circuit Voltage (which was about 0.10 V) at a scan rate of 2 mV s−1 upto 0.5 V, such that the hydrogen molecules that have possibly diffused across the cathode are instantly oxidized under mass transfer limited conditions. The cell was found to exhibit a mass transfer limited current density (Jlim) of 8 mA cm−2 at 50 °C and the H2 crossover flux at the cathode was calculated to be 4.1 × 10−8 mol cm−2 s−1 at 50 °C.
Schematic diagram representing the crystallite ordering in the case of (a) PA@TpBpy-ST and PA@TpBpy-MC pellets; (b) lifetime OCV measurement obtained using PA@TpBpy-ST and PA@TpBpy-MC as solid electrolytes in PEMFCs.
Along with the electromotive force (emf) measurements, the effect of temperature on the fuel cell reaction was studied using the in situ impedance technique at a frequency range of 1 MHz to 100 Hz and 10 mV voltage amplitude. The high frequency resistance revealed a solid-state electrolyte conductivity of 1.4 × 10−2 S cm−1 with a distinct catalyst charge transfer resistance (R2) in the low frequency region (Fig. 5b and S53). The improvement in the solid-state electrolyte conductivity under the real fuel cell conditions over the quasi-four probe conductivity could be attributed to the improved contact at the electrode–electrolyte interface. On further increase in temperature, owing to the thermal activation of the catalyst, R2 was found to decrease while the solid-state electrolyte resistance remained largely unaffected. Employing COFs as PEFMC solid electrolytes for the first time, the fuel cell reaction was driven by polarizing the fuel cell. The OCV lifetime measurement test of the MEA fabricated using the PA@TpBpy-MC pellet revealed that the pellet could effectively separate reactant gases only until 50 °C. As the ultimate fuel cell performance of the pellet is decided by not just the proton conducing ability of the pellet, but also its gas separating ability, which is very essential to build a stable OCV, the operating temperature was limited to 50 °C. Considering the large thickness of our solid electrolyte, the flow rate of the reactant gases was increased just before polarizing the cell in order to prevent fuel starvation of MEA under this stress. This resulted in a slight increase in the OCV from 0.9 to 0.92 V after which the polarization of MEA was initiated. The current (I)–voltage (V) polarization plots revealed a maximum current density of 29 mA cm−2 and maximum power density of 7 mW cm−2, thereby ascertaining the completion of the cell circuit and proton conducting nature of the COF (Fig. 5c). Although the performance is less compared to the Nafion® based PEMFC, we believe that this is a direct effect of the huge disparity in the electrolyte thickness in both the cases (50 μm in Nafion vs. 900 μm in COFs), as the rest of the conditions are similar.
(a) Schematic representation of MEA preparation using pelletized COF powder (1) preparation of Pt coated GDL (as anode and cathode), COF pellet (as solid electrolyte), (2–4) sandwiching of the COF pellet between two electrodes; (5–7) assembly of the MEA into a single cell stack; (b) Nyquist plots obtained at different temperatures (in °C), evidencing the high proton conducting ability of the material (1.4 × 10−2 S cm−1 at 50 °C); (c) fuel cell polarization plot obtained at 50 °C using dry H2, Pt, C/COF pellet/Pt, C, dry O2 electrochemical cell.
