Experimental
Materials
Poly(2,6-dimethyl-1,4-phenylene oxide) (PPO, MW = 30 000 g mol−1) was purchased from Sigma Aldrich and dried overnight at 70 °C. Radel® polyphenylsulfone (henceforth abbreviated as PPSU, MW = 63 000 g mol−1) was obtained from Solvay Advanced Polymers, LLC and dried at 140 °C for 2 h. Bromine, chlorobenzene, dimethylacetamide (DMAc), methanol, acetone, N-methyl-2-pyrrolidinone (NMP), 60 wt% aqueous hexamethylenediamine solution, 50 wt% aqueous trimethylamine solution, 1,2-dimethylimidazole, and chloroform were used as received from Sigma Aldrich or Fisher Scientific.
Synthesis of brominated PPO
Bromination of the methyl side groups of PPO polymer was performed according to the procedure published by Xu and co-workers.25 15 g of dried PPO was dissolved in chlorobenzene at 8% w/v and heated to boiling (∼132 °C) under reflux. In a separate flask, liquid bromine (Br2) was mixed with chlorobenzene at a 1 : 3 wt ratio (the amount of liquid bromine varied depending on the desired amount of benzyl bromination). This mixture was added drop wise (∼1 drop/5 seconds) to the PPO/chlorobenzene solution. After addition, the mixture was stirred at 132 °C for 1.5 h. The brominated PPO was precipitated in ethanol at a 5 : 1 v/v ethanol/PPO solution ratio. The degree of bromination was determined by 1H NMR.
Electrospinning
Brominated PPO (BrPPO) and polyphenylsulfone were separately and simultaneously electrospun into a dual fiber mat, where fibers of each polymer were randomly distributed on a rotating and laterally oscillating drum collector. PPSU was chosen as the uncharged component because it has good mechanical properties and excellent alkaline stability (it does not undergo hydrolysis at the ether linkage in the backbone because there are no tethered fixed charge groups).12 It was successfully used as the uncharged reinforcement in other nanofiber composite proton exchange membranes and AEMs.26,27Table 1 lists the electrospinning conditions for the two polymers. The flow rate of BrPPO was held constant for all electrospun mats, whereas the flow rate of PPSU was either 0.2 mL h−1 or 0.32 mL h−1, to give a final membrane with either 35 wt% or 50 wt% PPSU, respectively. Temperature and humidity during electrospinning were controlled at 23 °C and 35% RH, respectively. The PPSU content of a given mat was confirmed by dissolution in CDCL3 and analysis by 1H NMR.
Electrospinning conditions for making a dual-fiber AEM mat
PolymerPolymer concentration (w/w)Applied voltage (kV)Flow rate (mL h−1)Spinneret/collector distance (cm)PPSU25 (in 4 : 1 wt ratio NMP/acetone)+90.2 or 0.329BrPPO30 (in NMP)+120.39Membrane fabrication
The as-spun dual fiber mats had a fiber volume fraction of ∼0.2. Samples from these mats were immersed for 5–60 minutes in a solution of hexamethylenediamine (0.2 wt% in DMAc) to partially crosslink the BrPPO polymer fibers, where the degree of crosslinking increased with immersion time. PPSU fibers were not affected by this soaking step. After removal from the crosslinking solution, the mats were washed in DI water, dried, and compressed at 5000 psi for ∼20 seconds to increase the fiber volume fraction to ∼0.7. These mats were then densified by exposure to chloroform vapor at 23 °C, during which time PPSU softened and flowed to fill the void space between crosslinked BrPPO fibers. Excess chloroform was evaporated by heating the dense membranes at 70 °C for 1 hour. To convert the remaining bromomethyl groups to anion exchange sites, the composite films were soaked in a solution of free base at 40 °C for 16 hours, either trimethylamine (a 50 wt% aqueous solution) or 1,2-dimethylimidazole (a 45 wt% solution in methanol). The final membranes, with either benzyl trimethylammonium or 1,2-dimethylimidazolium cationic groups and Br− counterions, were stored in water until further use. Before a characterization experiment, the membranes were converted to the hydroxide counterion form by soaking in 1.0 M KOH at 23 °C for 2 hours followed by a through washing with degassed DI water.
Membrane characterization
1H NMR measurements were taken on a Bruker 401 or 501 MHz spectrometer where samples were dissolved in either CDCL3 or CD3OD, and analyzed by Topspin software. Images of the dual fiber mats and composite membranes were recorded by a Hitachi S-4200 scanning electron microscope (SEM). A thin layer of gold was deposited on samples with a Cressington sputter coater to minimize sample charging during scanning. The average fiber diameter in a SEM image of an electrospun mat was determined using ImageJ software. Mechanical properties of membrane samples (in the chloride counterion form) were evaluated using a TA Instruments Q800 dynamic mechanical analyzer fitted with a tension clamp at the strain rate of 30% min−1. Wet samples were equilibrated in water and patted dry just before testing; dry samples were equilibrated in air for 24 h at 20% RH.
The percent gravimetric swelling, the volumetric concentration of fixed charge groups in polyelectrolyte fibers (χ, mmol cm−3 water), and the in-plane hydroxide ion conductivity were determined at room temperature using methods described previously,22 where123
In the above equations, Wwet is the weight [g] of a membrane sample after equilibration in liquid water, Wdry is the weight [g] of the same sample after drying at 70 °C for 2 hours, IECmem is the measured ion exchange capacity of the composite membrane [based on the total dry weight of polyelectrolyte and PPSU, mmol g−1], ρ is the density of water [g cm−3], σ is the ion conductivity [mS cm−1], L is the distance between working electrodes in the Bekktech AC impedance conductivity cell [cm], R is the resistance of the membrane [Ω], w = measured wet sample width [cm], and δ = measured wet (liquid water equilibrated) membrane thickness [cm].
Membrane IEC was calculated using the Mohr titration method, where all membrane samples (∼0.1 grams in weight) were initially in the chloride counterion form.28,29 Chloride ions were then exchanged for NO3− by soaking membrane samples in 2 separate 20 mL batches of a 0.2 M NaNO3 solution. These solutions were collected (40 mL total) and titrated using 0.01 M AgNO3 with K2CrO4 as the end point indicator. IEC was calculated as the moles of Cl− titrated divided by the dry weight of the membrane sample. For uncrosslinked, water soluble polymers, IEC was determined using 1H NMR after dissolving samples in DMSO-d6.
The chemical stability of composite membranes was assessed by immersing samples in 1.0 M KOH for up to 7 days at 50 °C, 60 °C and 80 °C. Every 24 hours, samples were removed from the soak solution, washed thoroughly with degassed DI water, and tested for in-plane hydroxide ion conductivity. The percentage of initial conductivity retained over time was recorded.
Alkaline fuel cell tests
Membrane-electrode-assemblies (MEAs, with a geometric area of 5 cm2) were fabricated using a high conductivity nanofiber composite membrane, with a wet thickness of either 40 or 90 μm. Electrodes were prepared with either Tokuyama AS-4 ionomer solution (IEC 1.8 mmol g−1) or uncrosslinked benzyl trimethylammonium PPO (2.2 mmol g−1 IEC, which is insoluble in water at temperatures up to 70 °C). Each binder polymer (in the halide form) was mixed with water, methanol, and catalyst (Johnson Matthey Company HiSpec 4000 Pt/C catalyst powder, 40% Pt on carbon black), where the catalyst : binder ratio was fixed at 3 : 1 w/w. Mixing was carried out for 20 minutes using a sonication horn. The ink with Tokuyama AS-4 binder was sprayed onto a PTFE film and transferred onto the opposing surfaces of a dry nanofiber composite membrane by the decal method to form a catalyst coated membrane (CCM). The electrode hot-pressing conditions were 105 °C for 6 min under 10 000 pounds force. After hot-pressing, the CCM was re-hydrated in DI water, washed with 1.0 M KOH solution for 2 hours, and rinsed thoroughly with DI water.30 Sigracet 25 BC gas diffusion layers (GDLs) from Ion Power Inc. were pressed onto each electrode in the fuel cell test fixture to create an MEA. For the quaternary ammonium PPO electrode binder, the electrode ink was painted directly onto the Sigracet 25 BC GDLs to form gas diffusion electrodes (GDEs). The GDEs (anode and cathode) and membrane were soaked in 1.0 M KOH, washed thoroughly in DI water, and pressed together in the fuel cell test fixture. The platinum loading for the anode and cathode was 0.5 mgPt cm−2. MEAs were tested in a Scribner Series 850e test station at 60 °C with fully humidified H2 and O2 feed gases at 2 atm backpressure, where the gas flow rates were kept constant at 0.125 L min−1 for H2 and 0.25 L min−1 for O2. MEAs were preconditioned by operating at a constant voltage (0.4 V) for ∼20 minutes, until the current density stabilized, during which time hydroxide counterions replaced bicarbonate ions in the electrode binder and membrane. Polarization data was then collected, where voltage was scanned from 1.0 V to 0.2 V with current measurement at a given voltage after 30 seconds. Hydrogen crossover limiting current was determined in the fuel cell test fixture from a linear sweep voltammetry experiment, where H2 and Ar gases were fed to the anode and cathode, respectively.31 The voltage was varied from 400 mV to ∼20 mV at 1 mV s−1 and the temperature was fixed at 60 °C. Limiting current data in mA cm−2 were converted to a hydrogen crossover flux (corrected for membrane thickness) using eqn (4)4where ilm is the measured hydrogen limiting current, [mA cm−2], n is the number of electrons in the hydrogen oxidation reaction [n = 2], F is Faraday's constant [96 485 C mol−1], and δ is membrane thickness [μm]. Crossover current was measured at cell gas pressures ranging from 1 atm (ambient) to 3 atm.
