4Results
Li6Y(BO3)3 crystallizes in a monoclinic space group and can be considered a polyanionic compound since all of the oxygen ions in the structure are part of BO3 planar triangles (Fig. 1(a) and (b)). YO8 dodecahedra share edges with each other to form chains that zig–zag along the c-axis, with BO3 group fanning out perpendicular to the chain axis.
Crystal structure of Li6Y(BO3)3. Illustration of the crystal structure of monoclinic Li6Y(BO3)3 viewed along the (a) c- and (b) a-axis. B is shown in blue, Y in gray, O in orange, and Li in yellow or green. Edge-sharing YO8 dodecahedra form chains that zig–zag along the c-axis. Trigonal bipyramidal chains of LiO5 form along the c-direction and connect the chains of YO8 along the a-direction.
Stoichiometric Li6Y(BO3)3 has six non-equivalent Li sites (see Fig. 2) in a dense and highly connected network. The layers containing the YO8 chains are separated by planes of lithium. These Li-rich planes contain four distinct sites, denoted LiA, LiB, LiC, and LiD, are colored yellow in Fig. 1(a) and (b). Each of the sites within this layer adopt a highly distorted tetrahedral environment, whereas the two other sites, LiE and LiF, are positioned between the YO8 chains, to form an edge-sharing chain of LiO5 trigonal bipyramids (see Fig. 2). All observed reflections could be indexed to the reported unit cell with no secondary reflections observed as seen in ESI Fig. S2. Aside from the peak profile, only the lattice parameters could be accurately refined and were found to be a = 7.182(2) Å, b = 16.44(1) Å, c = 6.641(5) Å and β = 105.37(3)°, with RBragg = 6.99%.
Local coordination environment of each Li site in Li6Y(BO3)3. Illustration of the polyhedral connectivity between the six neighboring Li positions viewed along the (a) [101] and (b) [010] unit cell directions. There are two distinct topologies in the structure: the edge sharing ribbons of LiE and LiF and the layers of LiA–D. For clarity, Y and B are not shown.
4.1Ionic conductivity
AC impedance measurements were collected between temperatures of 25 °C and 450 °C under flowing nitrogen, with the results shown in Fig. 3(a). Prior to measuring the impedance, differential scanning calorimetry and thermal gravimetric analysis were performed up to 1100 °C in N2, but showed no reactivity until the melting temperature of ∼870 °C (ESI Fig. S3). This implies the title phase is exceptionally stable to very high temperatures and does not exhibit any phase changes over the temperature interval of interest.
Temperature-dependent ionic conductivity with Li and Ag electrodes. (a) Arrhenius plot for the total lithium ion conductivity of Li6Y(BO3)3 as a function of temperature using Ag electrodes. An activation energy 0.61 eV is found by fitting data up to 350 °C, while an activation energy 0.93 eV is found when the data between 350 °C and 500 °C is fit. AC impedance obtained at 150 °C, using Ag electrodes (b) and Li electrodes (c). The minimum (maximum) frequency depicted for (b) and (c) are 192 mHz (614 kHz) and 1 Hz (1 MHz) respectively. The disappearance of the tail at low frequencies when using reversible Li electrodes confirms the blocking of mobile Li ions by the Ag. The red line shows fits to equivalent circuit discussed in the text.
The ionic conductivity at room temperature was too low to measure; however, above 50 °C, impedance measurements using Ag electrodes reveal a single semicircle with a linear tail, as expected when the motion of Li-ions through the pellet is blocked at the interface of the silver electrode (Fig. 3(b)). Replacing silver with a non-blocking lithium foil, shown in Fig. 3(c), causes the tail to disappear, confirming its association with the diffusion of lithium through the pellet. Conductivity measurements using Li electrodes could only be collected to 150 °C due to the low melting point of metallic Li.
After heating, the Li electrodes were removed and no sign of discoloration could be seen on the pellet. To further test the stability of the phase when in contact with Li, a pellet was wrapped in Li foil, placed in a carbon-coated fused silica tube and heated to 300 °C for several hours. After gently peeling away the resulting ingot of Li, the pristine white pellet was recovered, demonstrating a very robust stability when in direct contact with metallic Li foil.
The single semicircle in the impedance data was fit using an equivalent circuit consisting of a resistor in series with two parallel CPE/resistor components; a model meant to take into account the contact resistance of the silver (or Li) in series with ionic conductivity through the bulk and grain boundaries of the pellet. Despite the significantly increased temperature, no contribution from electrical conductivity was detected, with the dc resistance of the pellet remaining outside the range of the voltmeter, suggesting it to be several MΩ at minimum. It should be noted that the data in Fig. 3(b) fails to pass through the origin because of the high frequency limit of the potentiostat and that since the pellet is not fully dense, the individual arcs associated with the grain boundary and bulk transport cannot be fully resolved. For this reason, the reported conductivity values should be taken as a lower estimate for the true bulk conductivity of the material.46 A table of the ionic conductivity values at each temperature is given in ESI Table S1.
The temperature-dependent ionic conductivity, shown in Fig. 3(a), increases from 1.9 × 10−8 S cm−1 at 50 °C to 2.2 × 10−3 S cm−1 by 400 °C, indicating good ionic conductivities at higher temperatures. Two regions with distinctly different slopes can be see, with a crossover occurring around 300 °C. Fitting the interval between 50 °C and 300 °C to an Arrhenius expression gives an activation energy of Ea = 0.61 eV while fitting from 350 °C and 500 °C indicates an activation energy of Ea = 0.93 eV. The observation of two distinct linear regions in the Arrhenius plot is not uncommon, and generally indicates competition between two or more diffusion mechanisms.47
4.2MAS NMR spectroscopy
MAS NMR experiments were performed to examine the local environments of lithium in the samples. We first collected 1H NMR data, which are shown on the left hand side of ESI Fig. S4. No obvious differences were found between the empty rotor and samples made or stored in air for several weeks, showing no significant exchange of Li+ for H+ after synthesis. There is also no evidence that preparing the phase in air versus dry N2 results in proton substitution into the bulk. This stability with respect to proton exchange contrasts with Li-conducting garnets, such as Li6BaLa2Ta2O12, where rapid proton exchange can degrade the material's performance over time.21
The right-hand side of ESI Fig. S4 shows signals between 15 and 20 ppm in the 11B spectra corresponding to the three crystallographic sites; broad as expected for boron in trigonal-planar coordination. A sharp signal close to 1 ppm, with an area of roughly 10%, seems to indicate a boron-containing impurity is present in samples that were prepared in open air. While the composition of this impurity can not be directly determined, preparing the materials under dry flowing N2 appears to suppress this signal, which suggests this is most likely the result of a deleterious reaction of LiOH or H3BO3 with moisture in the atmosphere. Most importantly, once formed we find no evidence for proton exchange with the atmosphere in these materials.
Due to broadening effects of homonuclear dipolar coupling and the second-order quadrupolar interaction in 7Li NMR, the 7Li NMR spectrum contains only a single unresolved peak, which corresponds to a number of unique Li sites and coordination environments.48 Higher resolution spectra are possible for 6Li, due to the narrower line widths of the center band resonances that result from weaker quadrupolar and homonuclear dipolar coupling interactions of 6Li compared to 7Li. To improve the resolution further, we conducted a series of 6Li inversion-recovery experiments, which allow the resolution of signals as a function of the spin–lattice relaxation time, T1. The 6Li T1 data, shown as a pseudo-2D NMR contour plot in the bottom part of Fig. 4(a), reveal at least six different components, corresponding to distinct Li sites or groups of sites with similar spin–lattice relaxation behavior at room temperature. The T1 times for those components range from 850 to 2200 s, with the slowest spin-relaxation processes observed for the Li nuclei associated with the chemical shifts at the edges of the overlapping 6Li spectral feature at 0.2 and 1.3 ppm, respectively. The 1D trace projected on the top panel was derived by adding up the spectra of the three inversion-recovery experiments with the longest relaxation delay times and can be considered an adequate representation of a single pulse experiment with the required long relaxation delay.
Experimental and simulated NMR patterns. (a) 6Li NMR results for Li6Y(BO3)3. The contour plot shows the results of the inversion-recovery experiments indicating at least six different Li species. The projection on top represents the added traces of the longest relaxation delay spectra and a fit as a deconvolution into six spectral components. (b) Simulated 6Li spectrum of Li6Y(BO3)3 using the DFT chemical shift values for the six crystallographic Li sites and arbitrary Gaussian line shapes.
Based on the T1 resolved results, this trace was deconvoluted with a good fit into six spectral components. A static picture of the crystal structure would suggest that lithium occupies each of the six distinct crystallographic sites, Li{A–F}, in equal proportion. The integrated areas for the six components of the 6Li spectrum, however, are not all equal, but instead show relative populations from 1 to 0.09. Fitting with more equal-ratio spectral components would require deconvolution into at least nine functions, with multiple sites being concentrated around the extremes of the chemical shift range. We interpret this population inhomogeneity as indicating lithium-exchange between different sites on an NMR timescale, and can speculate that the signals at the edges of broad feature in the 1D trace correspond to collections of highly similar lithium environments that are preferentially occupied by lithium.
To help assign these NMR data, we used density functional theory (DFT) to calculate Li chemical shifts for each of the six crystallographic sites in the perfect Li6Y(BO3)3 structure, which were then used to construct a simple simulated 6Li spectrum by convoluting with a Gaussian line shape (Fig. 4(b)). It is important to keep in mind that T1 relaxation is a complex phenomenon that can not yet be accurately simulated, and a quantitative comparison of the DFT simulations and the experimental T1 NMR results is not possible. The shape and width of the simulated spectrum, however, do agree well with the experimental results. Although the calculated chemical shifts are systematically moved upfield by approximately 5 ppm, the calculated chemical shift differences are in good qualitative agreement with the observed distribution of maxima in the pseudo-2D spectrum.
Comparing the experimental and simulated 6Li NMR data, the fastest T1 times can be assigned to the LiE and LiF sites—the two sites located in the chains found in the same plane as the YO8 and BO3 groups—and the longer T1 times assigned to sites LiA–D—located in the Li-rich layers of the crystal structure.
4.3Computational Li-diffusion profiles
The presence of multiple non-equivalent Li sites in Li6Y(BO3)3 makes a mechanistic description of lithium-ion transport a particular challenge. To better understand the role of lithium disorder and diffusion by competing pathways, we performed DFT calculations on lithium interstitials, vacancies, and Frenkel pairs, and calculated potential energy barriers for lithium vacancy and interstitial point defect diffusion.
4.4Lithium defect energies
We first calculated relative energies for lithium vacancies at each of the six non-equivalent lithium sites. The calculated vacancy formation energies are listed in ESI Table S2. The preferred vacancy position is site LiA, with a vacancy formation energy of 4.09 eV (relative to metallic Li). Relative to the LiA site, vacancies at the other three sites in the Li-rich ac planes (LiB–D) are higher in energy by between 0.18 eV and 0.42 eV. In contrast, vacancy energies at LiE and LiF (those lithium sites in the 1D c chains) are higher than LiA by 0.62 eV and 0.70 eV respectively. Li vacancies, therefore, preferentially occupy the dense Li-rich LiA–D planes, which can be explained by the expected large reduction in Li–Li repulsion. The relatively low lithium ion density between the YO8 chains means interstitial lithium can be accommodated in between the LiE and LiF sites. The formation energy for interstitials at this site, relative to metallic Li, is 1.44 eV. The Frenkel pair formation energy was calculated as the difference in energy between a perfect stoichiometric system, and a Frenkel-pair-defective system with a vacancy at LiA (the lowest energy vacancy site) and an interstitial at a non-adjacent interstitial site. This gave a formation energy of 0.81 eV (Fig. 5).
Illustration of the Li sites with respect to each other. Illustration of the various Li positions with respect to each other viewed down the (a) c-axis, (b) with the Li-rich layer, and (c) within the 1D chains.
4.5Lithium diffusion barriers
To identify preferred diffusion pathways for lithium vacancies we considered potential paths between all lithium-site pairs with separations ≤4 Å (15 paths in total), and calculated barriers using the CNEB approach. These calculated diffusion barriers are shown schematically in Fig. 6.
Calculated energy barriers for vacancy diffusion between each site. Schematic of the calculated minimum energy barriers for all Li–Li site vacancy hops with site separations ≤4 Å. All energies are in eV, and give the maximum energy along each minimum-energy path relative to the energy of a vacancy at site LiA. Relative energies of vacancies at sites Li{B–F} are also given.
The lowest energy diffusion pathway for Li vacancy hopping is via LiA → LiB → LiB → LiA, which has a maximum barrier height of 0.23 eV. Vacancy diffusion via LiA → LiC → LiA → LiA has a slightly higher maximum barrier height of 0.34 eV. Lithium-vacancy transport along the b direction requires involvement of the LiE and LiF sites. These sites have the highest vacancy energies, and are also associated with large vacancy diffusion barriers. The lowest-energy vacancy-hopping process along b proceeds via LiC → LiE → LiF → LiD → LiC, and has a maximum barrier of 0.97 eV. The high vacancy diffusion barriers for transport along b means lithium-vacancy transport is effectively restricted to a 2D process within the Li-rich ac planes.
For lithium interstitial transport, the c-aligned chains of YO8 polyhedra block direct diffusion along a. We therefore only consider transport along b and c; in each case calculating CNEB barriers for interstitialcy mechanisms along these directions. The first considered interstitialcy mechanism involved only the LiE/LiF sites and corresponds to one-dimensional transport along the c-oriented channels. Instead of jumping directly to a neighbouring interstitial site, interstitial Li displaces a neighbouring lithium ion at either a LiE or LiF site, and this second moves to occupy the adjacent interstitial site. In the second considered interstitialcy mechanism, the interstitial lithium moves along b into the Li-rich ac plane, displacing the closest LiB ion. This second ion moves to the adjacent LiB site, displacing a third ion that moves along b to a new interstitial site. The CNEB calculated barriers for these two mechanisms are 0.20 eV for c-channel diffusion involving exchange with the LiF site (0.26 eV via the LiE site), and 0.80 eV for diffusion along b. This indicates interstitials can undergo rapid one-dimensional transport along the LiE/LiF channels aligned along c, whereas interstitial transport through the Li-rich LiA–D planes (which is necessary for transport along b or indirect transport along a) is much less effective. We attribute this highly anisotropic behaviour to a large energy penalty associated with disrupting the dense lithium packing in the LiA–D plane.
The calculated point-defect diffusion barriers reveal low energy pathways of 0.23 eV and 0.20 eV respectively for both lithium vacancies and interstitials. This suggests Li6Y(BO3)3 may exhibit “bipolar” ionic conductivity, where the dominant lithium-transport process depends on the precise defect stoichiometry of the samples. Interestingly, interstitial and vacancy diffusion are both predicted to be highly anisotropic, and also to preferentially occur in different regions of the crystal lattice. Vacancy diffusion is favored along a and c directions within the LiA–D layers, but again disfavored along b, because of the high vacancy energies for the LiE/LiF sites. Interstitial diffusion, in contrast, is favored along the LiE/LiF chains oriented along the c-axis, but disfavored along b, which involves disruption of the LiA–D layers (and effectively blocked along a by the YO8 chains).
