Experimental
Materials and methods
Chemicals
All the chemicals used in the present work were used as received without further purification. Nafion® solution (5 wt%) and Nafion® 212 were supplied by Dupont. H2IrCl6·H2O, PTFE emulsion (6 wt%) and 40 wt% Pt/C were received from Beijing Nonferrous Metal Research Institute, Shanghai Organic Fluorine Material Research Institute and Johnson Matthey, respectively. All other chemicals were purchased from Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co. Ltd.
Synthesis of catalyst supports
The antimony doped tin oxide nanowires were prepared using the electrospinning method.35b Firstly, 3 g of polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP, Mw ≈ 1 300 000) was dissolved in 40 mL methanol under stirring. For antimony doped tin oxide precursor solution, 0.1 g of SnCl2·2H2O with 0.018 g of SbCl3·2H2O were dissolved in 40 mL methanol under stirring. The PVP and antimony doped tin oxide precursor solution were then mixed together. After the solution was loaded into a syringe that was part of the electrospinning setup, the solution was ejected into the multi-nozzle with a throughput of 1.2 mL h−1 for single-nozzle electrospinning systems. The metallic nozzles were connected to a high-voltage power supply (15 kV), and a rotating cage collector was placed 12 cm away from the tip of the multi-syringe needle. Referring to the TG-DSC curves (Fig. S1), the as-spun antimony doped tin oxide nanowire precursor was firstly heated to 290 °C and maintained at that temperature for 1 h to volatilize the moisture residual solvent in the precursors. The temperature was subsequently slowly increased to 450 °C and maintained for 1 h. This step allowed complete decomposition of the PVP to obtain the nanowire structure of antimony doped tin oxide. Finally, the temperature was increased to 600 °C and held at that temperature for 4 h to crystallize the material. In the whole calcination process, a low heating rate of 0.5 °C min−1 was used to prevent the nanowire structure of antimony doped tin oxide from collapsing. The obtained support was referred to as Sb–SnO2 NW. The antimony doped tin oxide nanoparticle was also prepared via a co-precipitation method reported in a previous work as a reference for comparison and hereafter is referred to as Sb–SnO2 NP.15 It should be pointed out that the optimized Sb doping content of both the Sb–SnO2 NW and Sb–SnO2 NP is 5 mol% based on our previous work.21
Preparation of supported IrO2 electrocatalysts
A modified Adams method was used to synthesize the supported IrO2 catalysts.18 The metal precursor H2IrCl6·H2O, support powders (Sb–SnO2 NW or Sb–SnO2 NP) and NaNO3 were first mixed in distilled water. The water was gradually evaporated by heating the mixture to 80 °C. The resulting salt mixture was collected and placed in a pre-heated muffle furnace and calcinated at 500 °C for 30 min. The fused salt-oxide mixture was then cooled down to 25 °C and washed with distilled water to remove the remaining salts. The IrO2/Sb–SnO2 NW (in a mass ratio of 1 : 1) and IrO2/Sb–SnO2 NP (in a mass ratio of 1 : 1) catalysts were finally obtained by drying at 80 °C in a vacuum oven for 12 h. Pure IrO2 powders were also prepared using the same method as a reference for comparison.
Characterization
Thermogravimetric (TG) analysis was performed using a Netzsch STA 409 PC equipped with a Netzsch QMS 403 C mass spectrometer. Air was used as the purge gas and the samples were heated at a rate of 10 °C min−1.
The crystalline structures of the prepared Sb–SnO2 NW and Sb–SnO2 NP were characterized by X-ray diffraction (XRD) using a Marcogroup diffractometer (MXP21 VAHF) with a Cu-Kα radiation source (λ = 1.54056 Å) to characterize the catalyst crystalline structure.
The micromorphology of the prepared Sb–SnO2 NW and Sb–SnO2 NP was studied using scanning electron microscopy (SEM) (ZEISS and LEO-1530 FESEM).
The physical surface area was determined by N2 adsorption–desorption measurements (Micromeritics ASAP 2020, Micromeritics). Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) formulations were used to calculate the surface area. Pore size distributions were estimated by applying the Barrett–Joyner–Halenda (BJH) method to the desorption branch of the isotherms.
Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) analysis was carried out with a Tecnai G2 F20 microscope operating at an accelerating voltage of 300 kV. The samples were first ultrasonically dispersed in ethanol for 10 minutes, and then a drop of the dispersion was deposited on a holey C/Cu TEM grid.
The conductivity measurement of the supports was operated according to a previously reported procedure.15c The samples were placed in a home-made stainless steel chamber with a PTFE inner sleeve (the conductivity cell) and pressed by two stainless steel pressure levers with a diameter of 10 mm. The pressure was firstly increased to 3 × 106 Pa for 60 s and then to 3 × 108 Pa. Measurements were performed at 25 °C in a dry ambient atmosphere and the thickness of the pellet in the chamber was measured before and after the measurement using calipers. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy was used for the conductivity measurement with the frequency in a range of 1–106 Hz and an ac amplitude of 10 mV.
For electrochemical evaluations, the catalyst powders were dispersed in isopropyl alcohol, into which Nafion® solution (5 wt%) and a PTFE emulsion (6 wt%) were added. The mixtures were then homogenized for 1 h in an ice ultrasonic bath to form an ink. A 50 μL of the ink was pipetted on the surface of a glassy carbon working electrode with 7 mm diameter, followed by drying under a nitrogen atmosphere. For all the catalyst inks, the mass ratio of IrO2 to Nafion® and PTFE was 14 : 2 : 1 and the loading of IrO2 in the working electrode was 0.125 mg cm−2. The electrochemical properties of the catalysts were characterized with a VMP2 electrochemical workstation by CV, EIS, and chronopotentiometry in a 0.5 mol L−1 H2SO4 solution at 25 °C. A Pt coil and a saturated calomel electrode (SCE) were used as the counter electrode and reference electrode, respectively. The potential window of CV was from 0 to 1 V vs. SCE using a scan rate from 2 to 300 mV s−1. The EIS measurement was conducted at 1.25 V vs. SCE for the frequency between 5 mHz and 99 kHz with a sinus amplitude of 10 mV. The impedance data were modeled with ZSimpWin software. The polarization curves were acquired between 1.2 and 1.8 V vs. SCE with a scan rate of 1 mV s−1.
Electrolyser cell test
An ink composed of the prepared catalysts, Nafion® solution, PTFE emulsion and isopropyl alcohol was sprayed on a PTFE sheet to form an anode catalyst layer. After being dipped in the sodium chloride solution for 2 h and annealed at 340 °C for 30 min, the anode catalyst layer was dipped in 0.5 mol L−1 H2SO4 solution for 2 h and then in water for 2 h successively.37 An ink composed of 40 wt% Pt/C as the cathode catalyst, Nafion® solution and isopropyl alcohol was sprayed on a PTFE sheet to form a cathode catalyst layer. The loading of IrO2 was 0.75 mg cm−2 (determined gravimetrically within ±0.01 mg cm−2) for the anode side and 0.2 mg cm−2 Pt for the cathode side.
Pretreatment of Nafion® 212 was accomplished by being successively treated in 5 wt% H2O2 solution, distilled water, 0.5 mol L−1 H2SO4 solution and distilled water at 80 °C and 60 min for each step. The catalyst coated membrane (CCM) was obtained by transferring the catalyst film from the PTFE film to the pretreated Nafion® 212 by the decal method under the conditions of 135 °C and 75 kg cm−2 for 3 min. The performance test was performed in a PEM electrolyser under ambient pressure at 80 °C. A membrane electrode assembly (MEA) (with a 1 cm2 active area) was fabricated by placing the CCM between two carbon cloths. Distilled water was fed to the anode and cathode at a flow rate of 3 mL min−1. The cathode of the cell was used both as the counter and reference electrodes. Polarization curves were measured in constant current mode by increasing the current density from 0 to 2 A cm−2. As for the stability test under ambient pressure at 35 °C, the gas diffusion layers in the anode side were replaced by tantalum coated stainless steel felts.
