Experimental section
Materials
All O2 and moisture sensitive manipulations were carried out inside an argon filled Vacuum Atmospheres dry-box. Polymerization-grade propylene was used as received. TiCl3·AA, AlEt2Cl (10 wt% in toluene), trimethylamine (TMA) solution (∼45 wt% in H2O), N,N-dimethyl-1-hexadecyamine (DMHDA), 11-bromo-1-undecene, calcium hydride and heptanes were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. Other chemicals, including methanol, sodium hydroxide, allylmagnesium bromide (1.0 M solution in diethyl ether), diethyl ether (anhydrous), 4-vinylbenzyl chloride and hydrochloric acid were of analytical grade and were also from Sigma-Aldrich and used as received. Heptane was distilled over a sodium/potassium alloy with benzophenone as an indicator under argon gas protection. 11-Bromo-1-undecene was distilled over CaH2 under reduced pressure before use.
Synthesis of crosslinker p-(3-butenyl)styrene (BSt)
To a dry 500 mL three-necked round-bottom flask equipped with an addition funnel, condenser, and magnetic stir bar, 200 mL (0.2 mol) of allylmagnesium bromide solution was added. A 20 mL (0.14 mol) aliquot of 4-vinylbenzyl chloride diluted with 50 mL of diethyl ether was added dropwise to allylmagnesium bromide at ice bath temperature. After complete addition of 4-vinylbenzyl chloride, the mixture was warmed to room temperature and refluxed for 12 h. Then, 200 mL of distilled water was slowly added to the mixture. The aqueous layer was separated and washed three times with diethyl ether. The organic phases were combined and dried with anhydrous sodium sulfate. After evaporation of the solvent, the residue was further dried with calcium hydride and distilled under vacuum before use. Yield: 20.1 g, 94%. 1H NMR spectrum: δ 7.1–7.5 (m, 4H, phenyl–H), 6.7 (m, 1H, phenyl–CHCH2), 5.9 (m, 1H, –CHCH2), 5.7 (d, 1H, phenyl–CHCH2), 5.3 (d, 1H, phenyl–CHCH2), 5.1 (m, 2H, –CHCH2), 2.7 (t, 2H, phenyl–CH2), 2.4 (m, 2H, –CH2–CHCH2).
Synthesis of functionalized polypropylene without crosslinkable groups
In a typical copolymerization reaction, 100 mL of heptanes was charged into a Parr 450 mL stainless autoclave equipped with a mechanical stirrer in a dry-box. After removal from the box, the reactor was injected with a certain amount of 11-bromo-1-undecene as a comonomer and then charged with 20 psi (∼1.4 atm) of propylene to saturate the heptane solution at 70 °C. About 0.4 g of TiCl3·AA and 5.0 mL of AlEt2Cl (10 wt% in toluene) were mixed together and stirred for 30 minutes in the dry-box at room temperature to activate the catalyst and then injected into the reactor under rapid stirring to initiate copolymerization. Additional propylene was fed continuously into the reactor to maintain a constant pressure (20 psi) during the entire course of the polymerization. After a certain reaction time elapsed at 70 °C, the reaction solution was quenched by methanol, followed by pouring the polymer solution into acidic methanol solution. The polymer, denoted as PP-Br, was filtered and washed with THF and methanol thoroughly and dried under vacuum at 60 °C for 12 h.
Synthesis of functionalized polypropylene with crosslinkable groups
Terpolymerization of propylene with 11-bromo-1-undecene and p-(3-butenyl)styrene was carried out using similar procedures. 100 mL of heptanes was charged into a Parr 450 mL stainless autoclave equipped with a mechanical stirrer in a dry-box. After removal from the box, a certain amount of 11-bromo-1-undecene and p-(3-butenyl)styrene were sequentially introduced into the autoclave under a propylene atmosphere (20 psi). About 0.4 g of TiCl3·AA and 5.0 mL of AlEt2Cl (10 wt% in toluene) were mixed together and stirred for 30 minutes in the dry-box and then injected into the flask under rapid stirring to initiate the polymerization at 70 °C. After 60 minutes at 70 °C, the reaction solution was quenched by methanol, followed by pouring the polymer solution into acidic methanol solution. The polymer, denoted as nx-PP-Br, was filtered and washed with THF and methanol thoroughly and dried under vacuum at room temperature for 12 h.
Evaluation of crosslinking efficiency
The resulting crosslinkable terpolymer nx-PP-Br was dissolved in xylene at 130 °C, and the heated polymer solution was directly cast into films (thickness 10–20 μm) at 125 °C. The resulting films were then heated in a vacuum oven at 220 °C for 15 minutes. The resulting cross-linked films were subjected to vigorous Soxhlet extraction with refluxing xylene for 24 h under argon to ensure the removal of the soluble polymer fraction before drying the films and determining the gel content. The gel fraction of the crosslinked membranes was calculated by measuring the residual mass of the sample and then computed by the equation: gel fraction = (Wd/Wi) × 100%, where Wi is the initial weight of dried membranes and Wd is the weight of the dried insoluble fraction of membranes after extraction.
Membrane preparation
Membranes were prepared by hot-press processing at 160 °C under a pressure of 24 000 psi to remove defects, providing an average thickness in the range of 40–60 μm. In the nx-PP-Br terpolymer case, the membranes were further treated at 220 °C for 15 minutes under vacuum to complete the crosslinking reaction.
Quaternization and ion exchange
PP-Br membranes in vials were stirred in about 30 mL of 45% aqueous solution of TMA or DMHDA at about 35–40 °C for 36 h. After completion of the reaction, the membranes were washed with deionized water to remove excess TMA or DMHDA and then dried at 60 °C overnight, followed by vacuum at 70 °C for 8 h. The obtained membranes were treated with 1 M NaOH solution at room temperature for 48 h to obtain PP-R-y (R = TMA or DMHDA, y = Br content incorporated). The membranes were washed thoroughly to remove residual NaOH and stored in DI water prior to analysis. The nx-PP-Br terpolymer film samples after thermal crosslinking at 220 °C were quaternized and ion exchanged using a similar procedure; the samples are denoted as x-PP-R-y (R = TMA or DMHDA, y = Br content incorporated).
Membrane characterization
All high-temperature 1H NMR spectra were recorded on a Bruker AM-300 instrument in 1,1,2,2-tetrachloroethane-d2 at 110 °C. The polymer molecular weights were also analyzed on a PL-220 series high temperature gel permeation chromatography (GPC) unit equipped with four PLgel Mixed-A (20 μm) columns (Polymer Laboratory Inc.). The oven temperature was 150 °C and the temperatures of the autosampler's hot and the warm zones were 135 °C and 130 °C respectively. The solvent 1,2,4-trichlorobenzene (TCB) containing ∼200 ppm tris(2,4-di-tert-butylphenyl) phosphite (Irgafos 168) was nitrogen purged. The flow rate was 1.0 mL min−1 and the injection volume was 200 μL. A 2 mg mL−1 sample concentration was prepared by dissolving the sample in N2 purged and preheated TCB (containing 200 ppm Irgafos 168) for 2.5 h at 160 °C with gentle agitation. The melting temperatures of the polymers were measured by differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) using a Perkin-Elmer DSC-7 instrument controller with a heating rate of 20 °C min−1. The thermal stability of the samples was investigated by using a TA instrument thermogravimetric analyzer (TGA) instrument model TA SDT Q600. Preheating of the polymer samples was performed at 100 °C for 40 min under an argon atmosphere to remove moisture. Small amounts of polymer were placed in ceramic cells and the temperature was increased from 30 to 700 °C under a nitrogen atmosphere with a heating rate of 20 °C min−1. Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) was performed on a PE-1710 spectrometer from 4000 to 400 cm−1 with a 4 cm−1 resolution in 64 scans using polymer thin films. All mechanical properties (tensile strength, tensile modulus, elongation at break, etc.) were measured according to an ASTM D-1708 method. The dog-bone specimens (38 mm × 15 mm overall size and 5 mm × 22 mm in the gauge area) were die cut and performed using an Instron 5866 universal tester, with a load cell of 100 N and a constant cross-head speed of 1 mm min−1. At least 6 samples were tested in order to minimize possible errors. To assess the chemical stability, anion exchange membrane samples of 5 cm diameter were immersed in 5 M and 10 M NaOH solutions at 80 °C for a time period ranging 0–700 h. After contact, the membrane samples were separated and washed with DI water until the absence of the alkalinity in the effluent, followed by IEC determination and conductivity measurement.
Small-angle X-ray scattering curves of unstained dry membranes were obtained using a Rigaku (formerly Molecular Metrology) instrument equipped with a pinhole camera with an Osmic microfocus Cu Kα source and a parallel beam optic. Typical counting times for integration over a multiwire area detector were 1 h with typical membrane thicknesses on the order of 100 μm. Measurements were taken under vacuum at ambient temperature on dry samples. Scattering intensities were normalized for background scattering and beam transmission.
Ion-exchange capacity (IEC)
The ion-exchange capacities (IECs) of the membranes were measured in triplicate using a typical titration method. Accurately weighed samples in OH− form were immersed into 25 mL of 0.05 M HCl solution and equilibrated for 48 h under an argon atmosphere, after which the HCl solution was back titrated with 0.05 M NaOH solution using phenolphthalein as an indicator. IEC values of the samples were calculated using the following equation:where n1·HCl and n2·HCl are the amounts (mmol) of hydrochloric acid required before and after equilibrium respectively, and Mdry is the mass (g) of the dried sample. The average value of the three samples calculated from the above equation is the IEC value of the measured membrane.
Water and methanol uptake
The water and methanol uptake of the previously vacuum dried membranes were measured for 24 h in DI water and methanol, respectively. The reported measurements are based on the average of two readings of each sample of dimensions about 30 mm × 30 mm. Water uptake was measured at 20, 30, 40, 50, 60, 70 and 80 °C while methanol uptake was measured at 20 °C. The temperature was controlled by means of a thermostatic water bath. The weight percentage uptake W (%) was determined by the following equation:where Wd and Ww are the weights of the dry and fully hydrated membranes, respectively.
The swelling ratio was characterized by the linear expansion ratio, which was determined by the difference between the wet and dry dimensions of membrane samples after immersion in water at 20, 30, 40, 50, 60, 70 and 80 °C for 24 h (4 cm in length and 1 cm in width). The calculation was based on the following equation:
With the obtained weight percentage uptake W (%) and IEC value, the hydration number (λ) was calculated by the following equation:
Methanol permeability
Methanol permeability (P, cm2 s−1) was measured at 30 °C using a two-chamber diffusion cell method. Prior to the measurement, each membrane coupon (diameter = 2.5 cm) was soaked in water up to the fully hydrated state for at least 1 day. One chamber (80 mL) contained 10 M (34 wt%) methanol solution and the other chamber (80 mL) was filled with DI water. The diffused methanol was periodically measured using a Shimadzu GC-1020A series gas chromatography machine. Peak areas were converted into methanol concentrations with a calibration curve. The methanol concentration in the receiving compartment as a function of time is given by the following equation:where CA and CB are methanol concentrations of the membrane feed side and permeate side, respectively. A, L and VB are the effective membrane area, thickness and the liquid volume of permeate compartment, respectively. DK is defined as the methanol permeability and t0 is the time lag.
Hydroxide conductivity
AC impedance spectroscopy was used to measure the membrane conductivity on a Solartron SI 1260A Impedance/Gain-Phase Analyzer and an electrochemical interface (Solartron 1287, Farnborough, Hampshire, UK). The electrode system was installed in an electrically shielded thermo- and hygro-controlled chamber. The impedance measurement was carried out at a given temperature and relative humidity (RH). The OH− conductivity (σ) was obtained from the following equation:where σ is the hydroxide conductivity (S cm−1), R is the ohmic resistance of the membrane sample (Ω), L is the distance between the electrodes to measure the voltage drop (cm), and A is the cross-sectional area of the membrane samples (cm2). In order to avoid the effect of carbonation, the membranes were converted to OH− form and washed just before the conductivity measurement. Moreover, the tests were also conducted in water which minimizes the exposure to air. The impedance of each sample was measured repeatedly to ensure reproducibility for the measured data.
Fuel cell performance evaluation
A well-dispersed catalyst ink was prepared by mixing 46.4 wt% Pt/C catalysts (TKK, Japan) with de-ionized water, 1-propanol and AS-4 (Tokuyama Corporation, Japan) ionomer solution (5 wt% in 1-propanol) using magnetic stirring and ultrasonication. To obtain a catalyst-coated substrate (CCS) for the electrodes, the as-prepared ink was coated onto the surface of SGL 25BC carbon paper (SGL group, Germany) using an air spray gun (Iwata, Japan). The Pt loading and ionomer content in the catalyst layer were ∼0.60 mg cm−2 and ∼20 wt%, respectively. Anode CCS, PP-TMA-20 membrane (Tokuyama Corporation, Japan) and cathode CCS were assembled together in a cell fixture to form a membrane/electrode assembly (MEA). The electrode size was 2.25 cm × 2.25 cm (∼5 cm2). Fuel cell testing was conducted with a commercial fuel cell (Teledyne, USA) testing system at 50 °C and 100 RH%. Fully humidified hydrogen was supplied to the anode at 500 SCCM as indicated in the data, while fully humidified oxygen was supplied to the cathode at 500 SCCM. After full activation of the MEA for 1 h, the fuel cell polarization curve was measured under galvanostatic mode, i.e. holding the fuel cell at serial constant currents (for example, 50, 100, 250 mA cm−2, etc.) for 3 min. The cell voltage as a function of current density was recorded using fuel cell testing software.
