Experimental
Synthesis of nickel oxalate precursors and nanostructured nickel oxide
The commercial nickel foam was degreased by sonicating in acetone for 5 min, rinsed with deionized water and dried in air. Subsequently, the nickel foam was immersed in a 0.5 M oxalic acid ethanol solution. The reaction was kept at a constant temperature of 45 ± 2 °C for 0.5 h and the foam area was 5 × 6 cm2. A comparable trial was carried out at 45 ± 2 °C for 1.5 h in a 0.5 M oxalic acid ethanol solution with additional 5 wt% water to increase the loading mass of the active material. Afterwards, the nickel foam was rinsed in deionized water, anhydrous alcohol and dried in air, followed by thermal decomposition in a resistance furnace at 400 °C for 45 min in air. Thus, the nanostructured NiO decorated nickel foam was obtained. The loading of the NiO on the nickel foam could be obtained by measuring changes in the weight of the samples before and after calcination according to the involved phase transformation (from NiC2O4·2H2O to NiO) during the calcination process. In addition, nickel foam without immersion in the oxalic acid solution was subjected to the same calcination process (400 °C for 45 min in air), in order to investigate the contribution of the substrate to the electrode capacity.
Characterization
The microstructure and morphology of the as-prepared samples were characterized by scanning electron microscopy (SEM, LEO 1530 VP), transmission electron microscopy (TEM, FEI Tecnai G2) and X-ray diffraction (XRD, Rigaku D/max-rB) with Cu Kα radiation. Selected-area electron diffraction (SAED) was performed to document the crystalline nature of the samples. TEM specimens were prepared by ion milling at 5 kV (Gatan ion mill). Surface elemental information was detected by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS, ESCALAB 250). N2 adsorption–desorption isotherms of the samples were measured at 77 K by using a surface area and porosity analyzer (Gold APP V-Sorb 2800P). The specific surface area and pore size distribution of the samples were obtained. After cycling stability measurements, the microstructure of the electrode was also observed using SEM. In addition, thermogravimetric (TG, Mettler-Toledo) experiments of the as-immersed Ni foam sample were carried out in air at a heating rate of 10 °C min−1.
Electrochemical measurements
The pseudocapacitive properties of the nanostructured NiO electrode were studied using a potentiostat (CHI660E, Shanghai, Chenhua) with a three-electrode electrochemical cell at room temperature. The NiO decorated nickel foam was directly used as the working electrode, the bright Pt foil as the counter electrode and a SCE electrode (in saturated KCl solution) as the reference electrode. The electrolyte was a 2 M KOH aqueous solution which was prepared from analytical-grade KOH and pure deionized water (18.25 mΩ cm). Cyclic voltammetry (CV) and galvanostatic charge/discharge were carried out, and the stability of the electrode was evaluated through CV measurements at a scan rate of 100 mV s−1. In addition, the electrochemical impedance spectrum of the NiO electrode was collected by means of an impedance analyzer (ZAHNER Zennium) in a frequency range of 0.01 Hz to 100 kHz with a 5 mV amplitude at open circuit potential.
