Experimental
Materials
PEEK films with a thickness of 16 μm and 11% crystallinity were purchased from Victrex plc, Japan and cut into a size of 10 × 9 cm. Ethyl 4-styrenesulfonate (ETSS) was provided by Tosoh Co., Japan and used as received. DVB (technical grade, 80%) was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich Co., Japan and used without purification. 1,4-Dioxane was purchased from Wako Pure Chemical Industries, Ltd and dried over molecular sieves before use. Other solvents were purchased from Wako Pure Chemical Industries, Ltd and used as received. Sodium chloride (NaCl), sodium hydroxide (NaOH), and hydrochloric acid of analytical grade were purchased from Wako Pure Chemical Industries, Ltd. Pure water was obtained from a Millipore Milli-Q UV system. Nafion 212 obtained from DuPont was pretreated by boiling for 1 h in a 3% H2O2 solution, washing in hot pure water for 1 h, boiling for 1 h in 1 M H2SO4, and final rinsing in hot water again for 1 h. Nafion perfluorinated ion-exchange resin, 20 wt% soln of lower aliphatic alcohols/H2O mixture was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich Co., Japan and used without purification. The Pt/C catalyst was purchased from Tanaka Kikinzoku kogyo Ltd, Japan.
Preparation of PEEK-PEMs
PEEK films were added to a dried Schlenk tube. After the air was removed and purged with argon, a solution of DVB/1,4-dioxane (25 vol%) was added to the Schlenk tube in an argon atmosphere and heated in a water bath at 50 °C for 24 h. The obtained films were washed with 1,4-dioxane and immersed in 100 mL of 1,4-dioxane at 50 °C for 12 h to remove residual monomers. The obtained films (PEEK-DVB) were dried in a vacuum at 40 °C for 24 h.
A PEEK-DVB film in a Schlenk tube was irradiated with 60Co γ-rays at a dose rate of 10 kGy h−1 for 16 h under an argon atmosphere at room temperature. Then, a solution of 15 mL of ethyl 4-styrenesulfonate and 15 mL of 1,4-dioxane was degassed by argon bubbling and added to the Schlenk tube containing the PEEK-DVB film. The mixture was heated at 80 °C under an argon atmosphere for 6–24 h. Grafted PEEK films were taken out, and washed with acetone. To remove residual ethyl 4-styrenesulfonate and the free polymer on the film surfaces, grafted PEEK films were soaked in a large amount of acetone overnight. The obtained films were dried in a vacuum at 40 °C for 24 h.
The hydrolysis of ethyl ester was carried out in distilled water at 95 °C for 24 h to obtain PEEK-PEM.
Electrolyte properties of PEEK-PEMs
Grafting degrees (GDs) were estimated from the mass weighting as follows:1
In this equation, W0 and Wg are denoted as the weight of films before and after graft polymerization, respectively.
The degree of hydrolysis and ion exchange capacity was determined by a titration method. The dried films were immersed in 25 mL of an aqueous 3 M NaCl solution overnight (or 24 h) to reach equilibrium. Then, the remaining solution was titrated with 0.01 M NaOH solution by using an automatic titrator. The IEC was calculated according to the following equation (eqn (2)):2where VNaOH is the volume of 0.01 M NaOH solution and Wd is the weight of dried films. The weight of the membranes was quickly measured after the membranes were taken out.
The degree of hydrolysis, namely, the hydrolysis degree (HD) is calculated by the following equation (eqn (3)):3
Water uptake (WU) was defined by the following equation (eqn (4)):4
The membranes were fully hydrated in water at room temperature, and lightly wiped with Kimwipes to remove excess water on the surface. To measure the RH dependence of the WU and hydration number, the membranes were placed in a humidity controlled chamber under different RH conditions at 80 °C for 2 h. After the membrane was taken out, the membrane was put into a plastic bag and sealed to prevent vapor absorption or desorption and quickly weighed on a microbalance. The water uptake and hydration number were calculated using the following equations (eqn (5) and (6)), respectively.5
The membrane was placed between two platinum electrodes, and the proton conductivity in the plane direction of the membrane was measured by impedance spectroscopy at room temperature. The membrane was placed in an ESPEC PR-2K temperature/humidity-controlled chamber under the RH ranging from 30 to 95% at 80 °C. The proton conductivity was calculated from the obtained resistance (R) according to the following equation (eqn (6)):6where d (cm) is the thickness of the membrane and S (cm2) is the contact area of two electrodes.
Characterization of PEEK-DVB, grafted PEEK, and PEEK-PEM
Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) was performed on a TGA Thermal Plus/TG-DTA8120 (Rigaku, Japan) at a heating rate of 10 °C min−1 and a nitrogen flow rate of 50 mL min−1. Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) was performed using a Thermo Plus2/DSC8230 with the specimen of 4–5 mg at a heating rate of 10 °C min−1 to the temperature of 900 °C. Tensile tests were performed using an STA-1150 (A&amp;D Co., Ltd, Japan) and an Instron-4302 universal testing instrument. The mechanical properties of PEEK-PEMs were measured at 100% RH and 80 °C at a constant crosshead speed of 10 mm min−1. The tensile strength of PEEK-PEMs was calculated as an average of five samples. The XRD experiment was undertaken with a Rigaku SmartLab using CuK radiation (λ = 1.54 Å) at 40 kV and 45 mA in the 2θ range from 5 to 40°. The degree of crystallinity (DOC) of PEEK-PEMs was calculated using the following equation (eqn (7)):7where Icr and Iam are the integrated values of the PEEK crystalline peak and the amorphous peaks, respectively.
The degree of crystallinity of the PEEK phase in PEEK-PEMs (DOC′) was estimated by taking into account the introduction of poly(styrene sulfonic acid) and using the following equation (eqn (8)):8
The membrane electrode assembly (MEA) fabrication and fuel cell test
200 mg of Pt/C and 0.2 mL of 20 wt% Nafion perfluorinated ion-exchange resin were dispersed in a mixture of 4.8 mL of water and 4.8 mL of methanol. The solution mixture was sonicated for 3 h and coated onto the gas diffusion media (3 cm × 3 cm) of carbon and Teflon by spraying to prepare the electrode. The obtained electrode was dried at 95 °C for 10 min. The Pt loading was estimated to be 0.4 mg cm−2 from the weight of the gas diffusion media before and after spraying the solution mixture. The PEEK-PEM (5.0 cm × 5.0 cm) was sandwiched by the electrode, and hot-pressed at 170 °C under 1 MPa for 1 min and cooled to room temperature to obtain an MEA with an active area of 5 cm2 and Pt loading of 0.4 mg cm−2. The MEA of the hybrid PEM was assembled into a cell holder. The fuel cell testing was performed at a cell temperature of 80 °C under different RH of 100% and 30% RH using a single fuel cell device (Micro equipment Inc. me-300FC). During the cell test, hydrogen and oxygen were supplied at a flow rate of 50 mL min−1 each to the anode and cathode, respectively. The I–V curves were measured in the range of 0.9–0.3 with a step repeatedly, typically a few times, until the fuel cell performance reached the steady state.
