Experimental section
Materials and methods
Graphite (particle size: 150 micron, Cat# 496588), concentrated sulfuric acid (Cat# 320501), formic acid (Cat# F0507), sodium nitrate, N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP), poly(vinylidene fluoride) (PVDF), potassium bromide and barium chloride solution were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. Platinum (Pt) foil and Pt wire were purchased from Alfa Aesar. A standard calomel electrode (SCE) was purchased from CH Instruments, TX, USA. Hydrogen peroxide (30%) was purchased from Rankem, India. Potassium permanganate was purchased from Fischer Scientific. Acetone was purchased from Spectrochem, India. Milli-Q water (&gt;18 MΩ cm) was used in all the synthesis processes.
Synthesis of RG
GO was prepared using a Hummers' method.13 Graphite (particle size: 150 micron) (2.5 g) was first sonicated in acetone for 30 minutes. Thereafter, it was filtered through a sintered glass filter and dried in an oven at 45 °C for 2 h. It (2 g) was suspended in 46 mL concentrated sulfuric acid in an ice bath (0 °C) in a 250 mL round bottom flask equipped with a magnetic stir bar. Separately, synthesis was also performed by suspending graphite (2 g) and NaNO3 (1 g) in concentrated sulfuric acid for GO synthesis. 6 g of KMnO4 was then added cautiously covering a time span of approximately 20 min so that the temperature of the solution did not exceed 20 °C. The solution was then stirred at 35 °C using a reflux condenser for 3 h. After that, 92 mL of distilled water was added and stirring continuously for an additional period of 30 min. Then the content was poured into 280 mL of distilled water and 10 mL of 30% hydrogen peroxide was added to destroy the excess KMnO4. The complete removal of KMnO4 was indicated by a color change from dark to yellow. GO was then isolated by using a sintered glass filter and washed with copious amounts of water (500 mL). Washing was continued until sulphate was no longer detected in the filtrate which was confirmed by addition of barium chloride solution to the filtrate. Thereafter, the filtrate was washed with formic acid solution (20%) to intercalate formic acid in the inter-lamellar region of GO and dried in an oven at 60 °C for 24 h. Prepared GOs were named GO (150) and GO (150 + N) (NaNO3 was used during synthesis). The numeric 150 indicates the particle size of the parent graphite precursor purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. After drying, GO samples were stored in vials under ambient conditions. The bold sentence indicates the synthetic modification of this study from our previous study.14 For GO reduction, 0.5 g of prepared GOs were poured in a 500 mL conical flask. Thereafter the conical flask was kept inside the preheated hot air oven at 160 °C for 14 min to complete the exfoliation process. One of the aims of this work was to perform the exfoliation process at a lowest possible temperature to make the graphene synthesis cost effective. By performing several experiments, it has been found that 160 °C is the minimum temperature required for exfoliation to achieve high quality graphene. Digital images were taken before and after exfoliation and are shown in the ESI (Fig. S1). Two different reduced graphene (RG) materials were named RG (150) and RG (150 + N).
Characterization
The powder X-ray diffraction (PXRD) patterns were recorded by using a Bruker AXS D8 Advance with Cu Kα radiation (1.54 Å) with a step size of 0.02° in a 2θ range of 0–60°. Thermal gravimetric analysis (TGA) was performed by using a Perkin-Elmer TGA 4000 instrument in a temperature range from 30 to 900 °C at a scan rate of 5 °C min−1 with a N2 flow rate of 10 mL min−1. For morphological studies, dried samples were spread over carbon tape and gold coated for 120 s, and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) studies were performed using a Carl ZEISS (ultraplus) FE-SEM at 20 kV. Energy dispersive X-ray (EDS) experiments were performed at a working voltage of 20 kV and was standardized with the Co element by using a spectrometer (Oxford Instruments X-MaxN) attached to the SEM. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM, JEOL 2100F) experiments were performed under an accelerating voltage of 200 kV. TEM samples were prepared by drop casting the suspension of the sample (0.5 mg in 15 mL isopropanol) onto a carbon-coated copper grid and the solvent was evaporated under ambient conditions overnight. The Raman spectroscopy experiments were performed by using a Lab RAM HR 800 (HORIBA) with an excitation wavelength of 632.8 nm. Nitrogen adsorption/desorption experiments were performed on Quantachrome Autosorb QUA211011 equipment for surface area measurements. The samples were degassed under high vacuum at 100 °C for 24 h. FT-IR spectra were collected using a Perkin-Elmer spectrum BX spectrophotometer using the pellets of samples with KBr. Electrical conductivity measurements were carried out on a physical property measurement system (PPMS, Model 6000) Quantum Design, USA. Electrochemical experiments were carried out using a CH Instruments, Austin, TX bipotentiostat (Model CHI 760D) and potentiostat (Model CHI 620E). Capacitance measurements were performed using cyclic voltammetry, galvanostatic charge/discharge and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) techniques with a regular three electrode cell. Electrode preparation details and capacitance calculation methodologies are discussed in the ESI. The elemental analysis experiment was carried out on an Elementar Analysen systeme Gnbh, Germany. The samples were dried at 60 °C for 12 h before performing the experiment.
