Experimental section
Materials
Citric acid (99%), aniline (99%), and ammonium persulfate (APS, 98%) were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO, USA). TiO2 nanoparticles (Ti-nanoxide T/SP), cis-disothiocyanato-bis(2,20-bipyridyl-4,40-dicarboxylato)ruthenium-(ii)bis(tetrabutylammonium) (N719), butylmethylimidazolium iodide (BMII), lithium iodide, and iodine were purchased from Solaronix (Aubonne, Switzerland). Hydrochloric acid (HCl, 35–37%), boric acid (H3BO3, 99.5%), chloroform (CHCl3, 98%) and ammonia solution (NH4OH) were purchased from Samchun (Seoul, Korea).
Preparation of carbon nanodots
1 g of citric acid was transferred into a Teflon-lined autoclave (20 mL) and then heated at 180 °C in an electric oven for 4 h. In order to neutralize the CNDs, NaOH aqueous solution (10 mg mL−1) was dropped into the resulting orange transparent liquid. The CND powder could be obtained by adding ethanol solvents into the CND solution followed by centrifugation at 10 000 rpm for 10 min. The precipitates of CNDs were dried in an oven at 60 °C.
Synthesis of PANI-CND nanocomposites and fabrication of PANI-CND counter electrodes
PANI-CND emeraldine salt (ES) powder was synthesized using a self-stabilized dispersion polymerization (SSDP) method based on chemical oxidation polymerization at −42.5 °C.12 2 g of aniline monomer and 10 mL of HCl solution were added to 30 mL of deionized water. The obtained CND powder (the weight percentage of CND powder was 1 wt%, 5 wt%, 10 wt% with respect to aniline, respectively) and boric acid (1 mg) were dispersed into the aqueous anilinium ion solution, and then the solution was stirred at 50 °C for 3 h for passivation. 60 mL of chloroform was poured into the aqueous anilinium ion solution in order to induce interfacial polymerizations of aniline monomers. The oxidizing agent was prepared by adding 2.4 g of APS and 6 mL of HCl into the 10 mL of deionized water, and the resulting oxidizing agent was added into the reaction medium to initiate polymerization at −9 °C. The polymerization of aniline proceeded with vigorous stirring for 16 h at −42.5 °C. After washing with water, ethanol, and acetone, precipitates of greenish PANI-CND ES powder were obtained. The PANI-CND ES was fully reduced by adding 207.5 mL of 0.6 M NH4OH solution as a reducing agent. The products were washed with water, ethanol, and acetone as above in order to gain brownish PANI-CND emeraldine base (EB) powders. Secondary doping of the PANI-CND EB powders was conducted with CSA (CSA : PANI-CND EB = 2 : 1 by mole). 0.165 g of CSA-doped PANI-CND powders were dissolved in 5.0 mL of the meta-cresol/chloroform (7 : 3, v/v) co-solvent. The solution was vigorously stirred and sonochemically treated for 24 h to increase the solubility of PANI-CND powders within the solutions. In order to prepare PANI-CND CEs, the resulting CSA-doped PANI-CND solutions were fabricated as thin films onto the fluorine doped tin oxide (FTO) substrate using a spin-coater at 5000 rpm for 30 s. The spin-coated thin-film electrodes were dried at 40 °C for 16 h, and finally 650 nm PANI-CND CEs on FTO glass substrates were obtained.
Assembly of DSSCs with Pt and PANI-CND counter electrodes
FTO glass substrates were washed with deionized water, acetone and 2-propanol for 60 min, respectively. The FTO glass substrate for the photoanode was pretreated with 40 mM TiCl4 aqueous solution and heated at 450 °C for 30 min to form TiO2 compact layers on the FTO substrates. A paste of TiO2 nanoparticles was screen-printed onto the FTO glass substrate. Sintering of the TiO2-coated FTO glasses was carried out at 450 °C for 30 min. The FTO glasses with TiO2 thin films were immersed in the dye solution (0.5 mM N719 dye in absolute ethanol) for 18 h at 25 °C. The as-prepared working electrodes were assembled with the PANI-CND thin-film CEs into sandwich-type cells. A drop of the redox electrolyte (0.6 M butylmethylimidazolium iodide (BMII), 0.1 M LiI, and 0.5 M tert-butylpyridine in acetonitrile) was injected into the cell. For comparison of their overall performance to that of conventional CEs, a Pt-coated CE was prepared by dropping 5 mM chloroplatinic acid hexahydrate (H2PtCl6·6H2O) onto the FTO substrate followed by heat treatment at 400 °C for 30 min.
Characterization of materials and investigation of the counter electrodes and DSSC performance
Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and high resolution transmission electron microscopy images were obtained with a JEM 2100 (JEOL, Japan) and a JEM 3010 (JEOL, Japan). Morphological images of PANI-CND were acquired using a field-emission scanning electron microscope (FE-SEM, JSM-6701F, JEOL, Japan) and an atomic force microscope (AFM) (Innova SPM, Vecco, USA). The X-ray photoelectron spectra were recorded by using an AXIS-His spectrometer (Kratos/Shimadzu, Kyoto, Japan). Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) surface areas and Barrett–Joyner–Halenda (BJH) pore size distributions of PANI were obtained using a Micromeritic analyzer (ASAP 2000, Micromeritic Co., USA). Microstructural characterization of the PANI-CND EB was performed by Fourier-transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy (Frontier FT-IR spectrometer, Perkin Elmer, USA) and solid state 13C NMR spectroscopy (Avance II, Bruker, Germany). The electrical conductivity was measured with a four-probe system using a KEITHLY 2400 (KEITHLY, USA). The X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns were taken by using Smartlab (Rigaku, Japan). CV (WBCS 3000, Wonatech, Korea) was conducted in an electrolyte containing 10 mM LiI, 1 mM I2, and 0.1 M LiClO4 in acetonitrile. The symmetrical dummy cells were prepared by assembling two identical CEs and injecting the electrolyte as used for DSSCs to measure EIS and Tafel polarization curves using Zive lab (Wonatech, Korea). The photocurrent–voltage (I–V) characteristics of DSSCs with various counter electrodes were evaluated using a 500 W xenon lamp (XIL model 05A50KS source units; AM 1.5G solar irradiance; intensity: 100 mW cm−2).
