Experimental
Materials
Polyetherimide (PEI, Ultem 1000, Saudi Basic Industries Corporation) was purchased from Dongguan Jiangxin Plastic Co., Ltd., China. Polyurethane (PU, Elastollan 2280A10) was supplied by BASF Co., Ltd. Silica nanoparticles (SiO2 NPs, diameter of particles, 7–40 nm, specific surface area, 120 m2 g−1) were obtained from Aladdin Chemistry Co. Ltd. N,N-Dimethylformamide (DMF) was bought from Shanghai Lindi Chemical Reagents Co., Ltd., China. The Celgard 2320 membrane (Celgard, China) with a thickness of about 20 μm was used as a comparison sample. All chemicals were of analytical grade and used as received without further purification.
Fabrication of SiO2–PEI–PU nanofibrous membranes
To prepare 7 wt% SiO2–PEI–PU blended solutions, different amounts of SiO2 NPs (0, 2, 5, 8, and 11 wt% based on the weight of PEI–PU) were ultrasonically dispersed into DMF for 10 min, respectively, followed by the addition of a certain amount of PEI–PU (1/1, w/w) under vigorous stirring for another 12 h. The above-mentioned SiO2–PEI–PU blended solutions were loaded into a 10 mL syringe and injected through a plastic needle at a feed rate of 1 mL h−1 by using a DXES-3 spinning equipment (Shanghai Oriental Flying Nanotechnology Co., Ltd., China). A high voltage of 30 kV was applied to the needle tip, and the distance from the spinneret to an aluminum foil-covered grounded rotating collector (rotating rate of 50 rpm) was 25 cm. The ambient temperature and relative humidity were 23 ± 2 °C and 45 ± 3%, respectively. Then, the resulting free-standing SiO2–PEI–PU membranes with an average thickness around 50 μm were dried in a vacuum oven at 70 °C for 12 h to remove the residual solvent and transferred into a dry box for further use.
Characterization of SiO2–PEI–PU nanofibrous membranes
The surface morphologies of the relevant membranes were studied by using a high resolution field-emission scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM, S-4800, Hitachi Ltd., Japan). The average pore sizes and pore size distributions of the as-prepared membranes were measured by a bubble-point test using a capillary flow porosimeter (CFP-1100AI, Porous Materials Inc., USA). Porosities (P) of the resultant membranes were determined by using n-butanol uptake tests, which were calculated by the following equation:1where MBuOH and Mm are the masses of n-butanol and dry membranes, respectively. ρBuOH is the density of n-butanol, and ρm is the density of dry membranes, which is calculated by the composition and true density of each component. The electrolyte uptakes were investigated by the weight difference of membranes before and after soaking in a liquid electrolyte (1 M lithium hexafluorophosphate (LiPF6) dissolved in ethylene carbonate (EC)/ethyl methyl carbonate (EMC)/dimethyl carbonate (DMC) (1/1/1, w/w/w)) for 2 h, and then calculated according to the following equation:2where Wd and Ww are the weights of the membranes before and after soaking in the electrolyte, respectively. The mechanical properties of the relevant membranes were evaluated on a tensile tester (XQ-1C, Shanghai New Fiber Instrument Co., Ltd., China), and the bendability was measured repeatedly under a longitudinal strain that ranged from 10 to 30 mm at a strain rate of 10 mm min−1.24 Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR) spectra were recorded with a Nicolet 8700 FT-IR spectrometer in the range of 4000–400 cm−1. Energy-dispersive X-ray (EDX) measurements were conducted on a Philips Tecnai G2 F20 &amp; a Hitachi S-4800. Thermal shrinkages were tested by storing the relevant membranes in an oven at various temperatures from 90 to 170 °C for 0.5 h, after that, dimensional changes of the membranes were carefully calculated by the following equation:3where, A0 and A are the areas of the relevant membranes before and after heat treatment, respectively.
Electrochemical performance evaluation
The ionic conductivity (σ) of relevant membranes was measured on liquid electrolyte-soaked membranes sandwiched between two stainless steel (SS) blocking electrodes over the frequency range of 0.1 Hz to 1 MHz with an amplitude of 5 mV by the AC impedance method using a Zahner IM 6ex impedance analyzer. The ionic conductivity could be calculated from the following equation:4where d is the thickness of the relevant membranes, which was measured using an electronic micrometer (0.001 mm accuracy, CHY-C2 Thickness Tester, Labthink Co. Jinan, China), Rb is the bulk resistance obtained at the high frequency intercept of the Nyquist plot on the real axis, and S is the contact area between the membranes and the stainless steel blocking electrode. The MacMullin number (Nm) and tortuosity (τ) of membranes can be calculated by the following equations:56τ2 = NmPwhere, σ0 and σeff are the ionic conductivities of the liquid electrolyte (8.72 mS cm−1) and liquid electrolyte soaked membranes, and P is the porosity of relevant membranes. The electrochemical stability windows of the liquid electrolyte-soaked membranes were determined by linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) using a working electrode of stainless steel and counter and reference electrodes of lithium metal at a scan rate of 2 mV s−1 over the potential range of 2.5 to 6.0 V vs. Li+/Li.
Coin cells (2016-type) were assembled by sandwiching the separators between the LiFePO4 cathode (LiFePO4/carbon black/PVdF, 80/10/10, w/w/w) and the lithium metal anode. The mass loading of LiFePO4 was about 8 mg cm−2, much higher than that of most reported (about 2 mg cm−2). The cyclability and C-rate capabilities of the Li/LiFePO4 cells were investigated in a Land battery test system (CT 2001A, Wuhan Land Electronic Co. Ltd., China) in a potential range of 2.5 to 4.0 V at room temperature. All the assembly processes of cells were carried out in an argon-filled glovebox with oxygen and moisture level &lt;1 ppm.
