Experimental section
Synthesis
A certain amount of glucose and 5.88 g of manganese acetate tetrahydrate were dissolved in 70 ml de-ionized water with continuous magnetic stirring to obtain a transparent solution. Then, 1.58 g of KMnO4 was directly added to the solution and stirred for 30 min to obtain a brown mixture. The mixture was placed in a Teflon-lined stainless steel autoclave and heated to 180 °C for 30 min. The product was washed by DI water and alcohol several times and dried at 80 °C for 4 h. Finally, the powder was calcined at different temperatures for 2 h under Ar flowing at 100 standard cubic centimeters per minute (sccm). The samples were calcined at different temperatures for studying the effect of crystallinity on electrochemical performance.
Structural characterization
The crystalline structure and micro-structure of the samples were studied on a X' Pert3 diffractometer (PANalytical, Netherlands), using a Cu-Kα radiation source (λ = 1.54056 Å) with a step size of 0.013°, and a cold field emission scanning electron microscope (FESEM, HITACHI SU8200) at 5 kV and 10 μA, respectively. The lattice image was observed through high resolution transmission microscopy (HRTEM, FEI/Tecnai G2 F20 S-TWIN TMP) with an accelerating voltage of 200 kV. Raman spectra were obtained at resolution of 0.65 cm−1 with a Horiba JOBIN YVON Raman system (LabRAM HR Evolution) using an argon ion laser (532 nm) as the excitation source. The total surface area was investigated using nitrogen sorption analyses via a Micromeritics surface area and porosity analyzer (ASAP 2020 HD88, USA). The degas condition was set to 250 °C with 4 h under a vacuum of 500 μmHg (∼0.67 mbar), all the adsorption–desorption measurements were conducted at liquid nitrogen temperature. Barrett–Joyner–Halenda (BJH) method was adopted to calculate the mesopore surface area, pore volume and pore diameter, whereas the specific surface area and the pore volume of micropores were calculated using the t-method. A TGA/DTA instrument (Mettler-Toledo STAR system, TGA/SDTA) was used to study the pyrolyzing reaction in the spindle precursor under Ar gas flowing at the rate of 50 ml min−1, and the carbon content of the calcined samples were detected under oxygen flowing at the rate of 50 ml min−1. Electrical conductivity of the samples was measured using a direct current four-probe technique (ST-2722 semiconductor resistivity of the powder tester, Suzhou Jingge Electronic. Co., Ltd.) at a pressure of 4 MPa.
Capacitor fabrication and electrochemical characterization
The electrochemical performances of all the samples were investigated using 2032 coin cells. To prepare the working electrode, the slurry containing a mixture of active materials (MnO), carbon black and poly-(vinyl difluoride) (PVDF) at a weight ratio of 80 : 10 : 10 was bladed onto a Cu foil and then subjected to a thermal treatment at 120 °C with 12 h in vacuum. The mass loading of the active material on each electrode disk was 1.0–1.5 mg cm−2. The electrolyte was 1 M LiPF6 in a 1 : 1 : 1 (vol%) mixture of ethylene carbonate, dimethyl carbonate and diethyl carbonate, and a polypropylene film (Celgard 2400) was used as the separator. Li-ion capacitors were fabricated with commercial activated carbon employed as cathodes and MnO electrodes as anodes. The specific surface area of the commercial activated carbon approximates to 1800 m2 g−1 as studied in our previous work.31 The fabrication of cathodes was similar with anodes but on an Al foil. Half cells were also assembled and lithium foil was used as the counter electrode for investigating the electrochemical properties of anode materials. All the cells were assembled in an argon-filled glovebox in which both the content of oxygen and water were below 1 ppm.
Galvanostatic charge–discharge tests of all the cells were carried out on a Land CT2001A system (Wuhan, China) with various current densities. The operating voltage window for spindle MnO, activated carbon half cells and Li-ion capacitors were 0.01–2.50 V (vs. Li/Li+), 2.00–4.50 V (vs. Li/Li+) and 0.10–4.00 V (spindle MnO//AC), respectively. Cyclic voltammograms (CVs) were obtained on a Solartron SI 1287 at the scanning rate of 0.1 mV s−1 for characterizing the redox reaction of electrode materials during the charge/discharge process. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) was performed at 3.0 V using the Solartron 1287A in conjunction with a Solartron 1260A impedance analyzer over the frequency range from 100 kHz to 0.1 Hz and the AC amplitude was 10.0 mV. The current densities applied to the half cells were calculated on the mass of active materials of electrodes and Li-ion capacitors were determined based on total mass of active materials on both electrodes. All the electrochemical measurements were carried out at room temperature. The specific energy and specific power values of Li-ion capacitors were calculated as follows:P = I × ΔV/mE = P × tΔV = Vmax − Vminwhere C is the discharge capacitance and t is the discharge time, Vmax is the potential at the beginning of discharge after the IR drop, and Vmin is the potential at the end of discharge.
