Experimental
Materials and reagents
Commercially available ∼50 μm pyromellitic dianhydride-oxydianiline (PMDA-ODA) polyimide films (PI) were purchased from Qian Feng Insulating Material Company (Shanghai, China). KOH, NH3·H2O, and AgNO3 (99.8%) purchased from Aladdin Industrial Corporation (Shanghai, China) were used without further purification. MWNTs and the dispersion were supplied by BoYu GaoKe, China. The photosensitive dry films with a thickness of 50 μm, covered with a blue protective layer, were produced by Xide Electronic, China.
Preparation of interdigital electrode
After carefully cleaning in acetone, ethanol, and DI water, the flexible PI substrate bonded to a glass substrate was immersed in 4 M KOH aqueous solution for 90 min at room temperature and subsequently washed with a sufficient amount of ethanol and DI water. The photosensitive dry films were stuck tightly to the treated PI. The prepared films were exposed in the open air for 1 min with patterned IDE films used as a mask. Then, the exposed PI was developed with 0.1 M NaHCO3 to form the patterns of interdigital electrodes (IDEs). Subsequently, the mask-protected PI films were soaked in 0.02 M Ag(NH3)2+ solution for 10 min. The protected PI films were further dipped into 0.02 M H2O2 for 1–2 min until shiny Ag films were obtained on the exposed PI regions. The Ag films were selectively grown on PI substrate and Ag IDEs on PI were prepared.
Preparation of Ag/MWNT IDEs
For the preparation of the active material, 90 wt% MWNT and 10 wt% MWNT dispersion agents were mixed in DI water and sonicated for 1 hour. The PI films with Ag IDEs were dipped into the MWNT solution and dried. By this procedure, the active MWNT material was selectively deposited onto Ag IDEs. Then, the masking photosensitive films were removed by acetone. Finally, Ag/MWNT IDEs were obtained.
Fabrication of SMIE-MSCs
For solid electrolyte preparation, 5 mL H3PO4, 50 mL DI water and 5 g PVA powder were mixed. The solution was stirred at 85 °C until the solution became a clear gel. Subsequently, 0.01 mL gel solution was dropped carefully on Ag/MWNT IDEs. After vaporizing the excess water, an all-solid-state SMIE-MSC was obtained.
SMIE-MSCs characterization
The microstructures of the SMIE-MSCs were investigated by scanning electron microscopy (SEM, Hitachi S4800), atomic force microscopy (AFM, Nano Navi SII E Sweep) and optical microscopy (Caikon DMM-2200). The chemical composition was characterized by Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR, Nicolet 6700), X-ray diffraction (XRD, Rigaku D/Max2500VB2+/PC), and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS, AXIS UltraDLD). Electrical measurements were carried out on a Hall effect measurement system (RH2035). The electrochemical properties of the MSCs were investigated with cyclic voltammetry (CV), chronopotentiometry (CP) and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements, using a CHI660D electrochemical workstation. The electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) was carried out in the frequency range from 100 kHz to 0.01 Hz with a potential amplitude of 5 mV. Adhesion of the thin metalized films to their substrates was first characterized using a simple adhesive tape peel test (cross-cut tape test of type-ASTM D 3359 3M, Scotch, magic tape 810). The flexing or bending test was performed on a mechanical stirring machine (Shanghai Lushuo JB50-D, China).
