2.Experimental
2.1.Materials and chemicals
Tetraethyl orthosilicate (TEOS, 98%), (3-aminopropyl) triethoxysilane (APTES, 98%), cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB, 99%), 2-(N-morpholino) ethanesulfonic acid (99%), 1-(3-dimethylaminopro-pyl)-3-ethylcarbodiimide hydrochloride (EDC, 99%) and N-hydroxysuccinimide (NHS, 99%) were purchased from Aladdin. Aspartic acid, phosphoserine and cysteine were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich. Nafion solution (5 wt%, DE520) was supplied by Dupont. Toluene obtained from Guangfu Fine Chemical Research Institute (Tianjin, China) was dehydrated with sodium and distilled prior to use. All other reagents were of analytical pure grade and used without further purification.
2.2.Preparation and modification of hollow mesoporous silica microspheres
The preparation and modification process of hollow mesoporous silica (HMS) microspheres is illustrated in Fig. 1. Firstly, silica (SiO2) microspheres were prepared by the typical Stöber method.37 Briefly, 7 mL of TEOS was added into the mixed solution of ethanol (100 mL), water (10 mL) and ammonia solution (5 mL), and stirred vigorously for 12 h; the obtained SiO2 was washed and dried until constant weight was achieved. Secondly, 100 mg of the as-prepared SiO2 was dispersed in a mixed solution of ethanol (30 mL), water (50 mL) and ammonia solution (0.6 mL), then 10 mg of CTAB was added into the solution and stirred for 1.5 h. After that, 0.25 mL of TEOS was added quickly and stirred for 6 h; the obtained core–shell SiO2 was washed by three cycles of centrifugation. Thirdly, the core–shell SiO2 was suspended in 0.2 mol L−1 NaCO3 aqueous solution and stirred at 50 °C for 16 h. The products, hollow SiO2, were washed thoroughly with water and dried under vacuum.38 Subsequently, 1 g of hollow SiO2 was dispersed in 5 wt% methanolic HCl and refluxed at 65 °C for 48 h. After removal of CTAB, the products, HMS, were washed with water and collected by centrifugation.
Schematic illustration of synthesis of amino acid functionalized hollow mesoporous silica microspheres.
HMS microspheres were functionalized by amino acids by two steps, including the modification of HMS by amino groups and the amidation reaction. 1 g of HMS microspheres were suspended in anhydrous toluene, then 2 mL of APTES was added and the mixture was refluxed under a nitrogen atmosphere at 110 °C for 24 h. The obtained products were designated as HMS-NH2. Afterwards, three parallel syntheses were conducted using three kinds of amino acids (aspartic acid, phosphoserine and cysteine). 0.5 g of amino acids were added into 100 mL of 2-(N-morpholino) ethanesulfonic acid (MES, 50 mM, pH = 6.5), and then 10 mmol of EDC and 15 mmol of NHS were added into the solution under vigorous stirring at 30 °C for 2 h to activate the carboxylic acid groups in amino acids. After activation, HMS-NH2 microspheres were suspended in the above solution under ultrasonication and allowed to react at 30 °C for 5 h, followed by washing and centrifugation. Herein, the cysteine functionalized HMS was oxidized by 30 wt% hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) for 24 h.39 The final obtained HMS functionalized by aspartic acid, phosphoserine and oxidized cysteine is designated as HMS-Asp, HMS-Phos and HMS-Cys, respectively.
2.3.Preparation of hybrid membranes
The received Nafion solution was dried at 60 °C for 48 h. The obtained Nafion resin (0.4 g) was dissolved in N,N-dimethylacetamide (8 mL) to obtain a homogeneous solution. A preweighed amount of amino acid functionalized HMS microspheres was dispersed in the above solution under ultrasonication for 1 h and stirring for 6 h. The resultant mixture was cast onto a clean glass plate after degasification, followed by heating at 80 °C for 12 h and annealing at 120 °C for 10 h. All the membranes were pretreated before use, i.e. soaking in 3 wt% H2O2, water, and 1 M sulfuric acid at 80 °C successively. Finally each membrane was washed with water until the pH was neutral. The fabricated hybrid membranes are named Nafion/HMS-X-Y, where X includes Asp, Phos and Cys, and Y (= 2, 4) is the weight percent of inorganic fillers. As a comparison, the pure Nafion membrane (designated as recast Nafion) and Nafion incorporated with non-functionalized HMS (designated as Nafion/HMS) were also prepared using the same procedure. The average thickness of all the membranes was in the range of 70–80 μm.
2.4.Characterization
The overall morphology of microspheres was observed by transmission electron microscopy (TEM, Tecnai G2 F20). The cross-sectional morphology of the membranes was observed by using a field emission scanning electron microscope (FESEM, Hitachi S-4800). The samples were prepared by freeze-fracturing membranes in liquid N2 and subsequently coated with a thin layer of sputtered gold.
The specific surface area was measured by the Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) method using a TriStar 3000 system. The surface elemental composition of samples was detected by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS, Axis Ultra DLD). Fourier transform infrared spectra (FTIR) of the membranes were recorded by using a Nicolet 6700 instrument. The crystalline structure of the membranes was probed by small-angle X-ray scattering (SAXS, RigakuD/max2500v/Pc) in the range of 0.5–5°. Before SAXS measurements, all the membranes were soaked in de-ionized water at room temperature for 24 h, and then the surface water on the membranes was removed by filter papers.
Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) was performed on a Perkin–Elmer Pyris over the temperature range of 30–800 °C at a heating rate of 10 °C min−1 under N2 flow. Before testing, all the membrane samples were vacuum-dried for 24 h.
The oxidative stability of microspheres was measured by Fenton's test.40 1.5 g of HMS microspheres were immersed in Fenton solution (3 wt% H2O2, 4 ppm Fe2+) at 80 °C for 72 h, and then the degradation of microspheres could be estimated by the weight loss.
2.5.Water uptake and dimensional swelling
The water uptake and dimensional swelling of membranes were measured by calculating the weight and area difference between dry and wet samples as reported in the literature,4112where Wdry and Wwet, and Adry and Awet are the weight and area of dry and wet membranes, respectively.
2.6.Proton conductivity
The proton impedance of membranes was measured on a four-point-probe apparatus over a frequency range of 1 Hz−1 MHz using a frequency response analyzer (FRA, PARSTAT 2273). For the measurement of temperature-dependent proton conductivity at 100% relative humidity (RH), the temperature was controlled by the water vapor from room temperature to 100 °C. The fully hydrated membrane was put into a climate box at 40 °C and 20% RH; during the whole process, time-dependent proton conductivity was measured. For the measurement of humidity-dependent proton conductivity, the saturated steam of KCl, NaNO3, NaBr and MgCl2 was used to maintain the RH at 78.9%, 65.4%, 51.4% and 26.1%. The proton conductivity was calculated according to the following equation,3where l0 and A are the distance between the electrodes and the effective membrane area, respectively, and R is the membrane resistance derived from the FRA.
