Experimental
Synthesis
Ingots of TixZr1−xNiSn0.975Ge0.025 were first prepared by melting a mixture of high purity elements (Ti, Zr, Ni, Sn and Sb &gt;99.9%) in the desired stoichiometry using an induction furnace. In order to prevent oxidation during induction melting, the sample mixture was first sealed in a quartz tube under a residual pressure of 10−3 Torr. In addition, the induction melting chamber was maintained under the vacuum during the synthesis. Each ingot was melted three times to ensure homogeneity. The resulting ingots were thoroughly ground under argon atmosphere using an agate mortar and pestle. The polycrystalline powder was sealed in a quartz tube under a residual pressure of 10−3 Torr and annealed sequentially to 300 °C for 3 days then to 900 °C for 7 days. The annealed powder was then loaded into a stainless-steel jar with stainless-steel balls for a 2 h mechanical alloying process using a SPEX SamplePrep Mixer/Mill. The resulting powder was consolidated into a pellet at 950 °C under 100 MPa using a uniaxial hot press. The relative density of TixZr1−xNiSn0.975Ge0.025 pellets used for in this study was above 95%.
Characterization
The structure and phase purity of the as-prepared powder with different Ti/Zr ratios was examined by powder X-ray diffraction (PXRD) using monochromated Cu-Kα radiation on a rotating anode Rigaku diffractometer operating at 40 kV and 100 mA. The internal structure of hot pressed pellets was examined by a scanning electron microscope (SEM, Philips XL30FEG) and a high-resolution transmission electron microscope (HRTEM, JEOL 3011). The thermopower and electrical conductivity were measured simultaneously from room temperature to 500 °C under a low pressure He atmosphere using a commercial ZEM-3 system from ULVAC-RIKO. The instrument precision on thermopower and electrical conductivity data is ±4%. The thermal conductivity was calculated from thermal diffusivity data measured by the laser flash method (Linseis, LFA 1000) from room temperature to 500 °C under dynamic vacuum (∼10−3 Torr). The instrument precision on thermal diffusion data is ±5%.
