5.Conclusions
Scandium substitution of the tin site within BaSnO3 has been achieved by solid-state synthesis. Some degree of phase segregation was observed in the dry materials but it has largely disappeared in the BaSn0.6Sc0.4O2.8 sample after D2O treatment. Analysis of X-ray and neutron diffraction data has indicated an average cubic symmetry of space group Pm3̄m and the deuteron position was successfully located at the 24k site (0.579(3), 0.217(3), 0) from Rietveld analysis. 119Sn solid-state NMR revealed a series of local tin environments consistent with 6 and 5 coordinate Sn environments and BaSnO3 impurities. The resonance from the 6-coordinate site is broad indicating a wide range of Sn environments differing in the number of Sn and Sc cation in the 1st B-site cation coordination shell. This behaviour is very different to the structure of BaSn1−xYxO3−δ with a high concentration of yttrium, in which Y–O–Sn ordering occurs. The five-coordinated Sn is observed at high Sc doping levels (x ≥ 0.4), confirming the presence of oxygen vacancies nearby tin. Conversely, the 45Sc NMR data showed the existence of intense peaks for five-coordinated Sc, the relative fraction of five to six-coordinated Sc increasing with decreasing Sc content, suggesting preferential trapping of oxygen vacancies in between or near Sc cations at lower Sc concentrations. For all compositions, the five coordinated Sc and Sn environments vanished after hydration as OH groups filled the available oxygen vacancies.
BaSn0.6Sc0.4O3−δ was found to be predominantly a p-type conductor under oxidizing atmospheres with proton conduction dominating at lower temperatures. The competition between holes and protons results in a suppression of the conductivity at T &gt; 450 °C in wet oxidizing conditions in comparison to dry oxygen. This mixed ionic and electron hole conduction means that the material could be utilized in gas separation membrane applications or cathodes of proton conducting fuel cells. The current study showed that highly scandium substituted BaSnO3 supports very high bulk proton conductivity, comparable to that reported for Y-doped BaZrO3 and the double perovskite Ba2YSnO5.5. It is suggested that further work on the material should focus on the growth of large grained samples in order to reduce grain boundary resistance, and investigate the chemical stability of the material under CO2 atmospheres. Given the present findings, solution synthesis routes aiming to create a more homogeneous mixing of the B-site ions at the atomic level are also of potential interest.
