Experimental
Materials and instrumentation
Infrared spectra (4000–400 cm−1, resol. 0.5 cm−1) were recorded on a Varian 660 FTIR spectrometer using KBr pellets and the transmission technique. Powder X-ray diffraction was carried out on a Rigaku Miniflex X-ray Diffractometer. Measurements were done from 3° to 90° with a turning speed of 2.5° min−1. Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) and differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) were performed using a NETZSCH Jupiter® STA 449F3 instrument. The measurements were done under argon (20 ml min−1) at 35–800 °C. Water and methanol sorption experiments were performed in an isothermal Setaram Calvert 80 micro-calorimeter, connected to a home-built manometric apparatus.43 Blank experiments were carried out at 30 °C by introducing a known amount of gas into the empty sample holder and measuring the final pressure. To calculate the amount adsorbed, the blank curves were subtracted, after a correction for the volume of the MOF sample itself. The phase purity of the bulk sample was confirmed by comparing the powder X-ray diffraction (PXRD) pattern of the as synthesised MOF with the simulated pattern from single-crystal XRD analysis. Unless stated otherwise, all chemicals were commercially available (Aldrich, &gt;99% pure) and used as received. The K4[Mo(CN)8]·2H2O precursor and the NdMo-MOF were synthesized according to previously published procedures.42
Procedure for measuring proton conductivity
Samples were prepared for impedance analysis by grinding the crystalline product with a mortar and pestle to uniform particle size. The disk-shaped pellets of the NdMo-MOF were prepared by using a press and a die measuring 13 mm in diameter. The pellet was placed between a pair of parallel copper plates anchored by a clamp. The typical thickness of the sample was ∼0.4 mm (±0.05 mm). The electrochemical cell was then fixed with clamp and placed in a humidity-controlled environment which is controlled by different saturated salt solutions. Impedance analysis was measured using 4-points method at different temperatures (30–90 °C) and relative humidities (20–98%). Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) tests were carried out under open-circuit voltage (OCV) condition using a Gamry potentiostat (Reference 600) with a frequency range of 106 Hz to 0.1 Hz and a voltage amplitude of 10 mV. The DC electrical conductivity has been calculated by measuring voltage and current at 21 °C and 26% RH.
