Experimental
Materials
Poly(vinyl alcohol) (87–89% hydrolyzed) was purchased from Aldrich Chemistry. Trimethoxy(methyl)silane (≥97.5% purity) was purchased from Aldrich Chemistry. Cellulose nanocrystals (0.94 wt% sulfur) with a typical diameter of 5–10 nm and a length of 200–400 nm were acquired from the U.S. Department of Agriculture's Forest Products Laboratory. Hydrochloric acid (6.0 N) was purchased from Alfa Aesar. Common laboratory salts and solvents were purchased from Fisher Scientific (Pittsburgh, PA). Unless noted otherwise, all materials were used as received without further purification.
Preparation of a cross-linked cellulose nanocrystal PVA membrane
PVA (5 g) was dissolved in DI water (100 mL) under stirring at 85 °C in a round bottom flask equipped with a condenser. The solution was then removed and allowed to cool to room temperature. CNCs (1 g) were mixed with DI water (20 mL) and sonicated for approximately 60 s until homogeneity was achieved. Xerogel synthesis was carried out by combining HCl (90 μL), MTMOS (1136 μL), and DI water (9766 μL) under magnetic stirring for 15 min. Upon completion, the xerogel solution was immediately mixed with the PVA solution in a glass vial and gently swirled for approximately 20 s to form two separate homogeneous binder solutions, with binder A containing a 1 : 1 mass ratio of xerogel to PVA and binder B containing a 1 : 2 mass ratio. The binder solutions were then immediately mixed with the CNC solution in glass vials at various specific mass ratios (40 to 80%) and gently swirled for approximately 20 s. All membranes have a total mass of 500 mg excluding water. The binder-CNC solution was then immediately cast into plastic Petri dishes and left to dry for 12 h. The dried membranes were then placed in an oven to cure at 40 °C for 48 h.
Characterization of the CNC-based composite films
The water uptake was measured by first recording the dry mass of individual membrane strips. The membrane strips were then immersed individually in DI water at 20 or 60 °C. After 24 h, the strips were removed and the surface was carefully dried utilizing absorbent paper. The mass was then quickly recorded to avoid the water loss during the measurement. The water uptake (WU) was calculated from:
The swelling degree was measured by carefully recording the dimensions of individual membrane strips (approximately 56 × 13 × 0.075 mm dry). The strips were then immersed in DI water at 20 or 60 °C for 24 h. The strips were then removed and the dimensions were measured again. The swelling degree (SD) was calculated as:
Tensile testing of the wet films was carried out at room temperature (25 °C) utilizing a RSA III Rheometrics System Analyzer manufactured by TA Instruments. CNC-composite films were immersed in water for 24 h prior to the tensile testing. Rectangular geometry tensile-testing quantified the stress/strain performance. The modulus was calculated by analysing the low strain portion of the stress/strain curve.
Infrared adsorption spectra of CNC-based composite films were obtained by the attenuated total reflectance technique using a Thermo Nicolet Nexus 670 FTIR spectrometer to characterize the chemical composition of the composite films.
Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) measurements were performed to characterize the change of glass transition and melting temperatures resulting from the crosslinking using a TA DSC Q2000 from 20 to 300 °C, with cooling and heating rates of 10 °C min−1.
Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) was performed using a potentiostat (VSP, Bio-Logic). Specimens from at least four batches were used. The applied potential was 10 mV, and the frequency was scanned from 1 MHz to 50 mHz with 5 points per decade. A home-made Swagelok cell was used to implement the EIS measurement, and two stainless steel rods with polished surfaces were used as the electrodes. The temperature was kept constant (20 or 60 °C) during the measurement.
