Experimental details
The AAO separators were fabricated by a two-step anodization method as shown in Fig. S3. Highly pure aluminum (Al) plates (99.999%, 0.55 mm thick, purchased from Goodfellow Ltd) were prepared as 2 cm × 7.5 cm specimens then degreased, which involved cleaning the Al surface with acetone and ethanol. Afterwards, the specimens were electropolished at constant 20 V and at 0 °C in a perchloric acid and ethanol mixture (1 : 4, v/v) for 6 to 8 min to make smooth surfaces and remove impurities like native oxides and dust. When the Al samples had “mirror-like” surfaces, anodization was carried out in 0.3 M oxalic acid solution by applying 40 V at 15 °C for 12 hours. Before conducting the 2nd anodization step, the alumina layer was etched away by chromium(vi) oxide solution immersion at 65 °C for 5 hours. The anodic aluminum oxide layer with highly ordered pore array was grown along pretextured nanopits during the second anodization step. Furthermore, the aluminum substrate was removed by immersing in a mixed solution of 0.3 M CuCl2 and hydrochloric acid at a volume ratio of 1 : 1. The bottom AAO barrier layer was removed by floating on a 5 wt% H3PO4 solution surface for 60 min in the final stage. To evaluate the structural and morphological features, manufactured samples were characterized using a scanning electron microscope (Hitachi, S-4800).
To characterize the electrochemical properties of the AAO separator, CR-2032 coin cells were assembled for specific purposes. Stainless steel disks were used as electrodes with liquid electrolytes (1 M LiPF6 in EC/DMC, at a volume ratio of 1/1) for the ionic conductivity measurements. AC impedance spectroscopy was used (CHI660E, CH Instruments) from 1 Hz to 1 MHz at room temperature with 5 mV amplitude to calculate the ionic conductivity (σ) in eqn (4):4where L is the thickness of the separator, A is the contact area between the separator and the stainless steel (SUS) electrode, and Rb is the bulk resistance.
The cell resistance was evaluated via an AC impedance test conducted with electrochemical cells composed of LiFePO4 (LFP) cathode, separator drenched with liquid electrolyte, and 150 μm thick Li foil. The cell assembly was performed under an argon atmosphere and the cathode was prepared by coating with a LFP (MTI Korea) slurry containing PVdF (Mw 540 000, Aldrich) as binder and Super P (Timcal) as a conducting agent (in a weight ratio of 8 : 1 : 1) in N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP, Daejung Chemical). The slurry was applied on the aluminum substrate (15 μm thick) using a Meyer rod.
The full cell consists of the LFP cathode, PP or AAO membrane with liquid electrolyte, and lithium titanate (Li4Ti5O12, LTO, MTI Korea) anode. The LTO anode was fabricated by coating 9 μm thick copper foil using a Meyer rod. The slurry was composed of LTO, PVdF, and Super P in an 8 : 1 : 1 (w/w/w) ratio. Each slurry was mixed with a homogenizer (AR 100, Thinky mixer) at 2000 rpm for 5 min. The manufactured full cells were subjected to analysis of capacity, cycling test, and rate capability by investigating the charging–discharging characteristics in a battery cycler system (WBCS 3000L, WonATech).
