2.Experimental
2.1.Sample preparation
2.1.1.Fabrication of the graphene pellets (GPs)
Nickel powder (Alfa Aesar) of 2–3 μm average particle size and 0.68 m2 g−1 in SSA was pelletized into a 6.4 cm diameter pellet using a hydraulic press (Carver, 973214A). The sample described above was heated up to 1000 °C in a tube furnace (FirstNano, ET1000) under Ar (1000 sccm). Hydrogen (325 sccm) was then introduced for 5 min, to reduce any metal catalyst oxide. Then, 25 sccm of CH4 was introduced for 1 minute. The sample was then cooled to room temperature at a rate of ∼100 °C min−1 under Ar (1000 sccm) and H2 (325 sccm). The final 3D graphene structure in the form of a pellet was produced by etching out nickel from the graphene/nickel pellet with 3 M HCl at 80 °C for 10 h. The obtained GP was washed with DI water to remove the residual acid. Details of the synthesis and procedures for the fabrication of the GPs can be found elsewhere.19
2.1.2.Fabrication of the GP/MnO2 electrode
MnO2 was coated on the GP by electrodeposition in the following way. GP was immersed into a plating solution containing 20 mM MnSO4 and 100 mM Na2SO4, and subjected to 5 min to 40 min deposition under a constant current density of 2 mA cm−2. After electrodeposition, the GP was washed with DI water to remove the residual electrolyte, and then dried at 60 °C for 2 h. The mass of the sample was measured before and after electrodeposition of MnO2, using a microbalance (Sartorius Micro Balance MSE6.6S-000-DF). This enabled the mass ratio of MnO2 in the GP/MnO2 composite to be calculated.
2.1.3.Fabrication of the GP/polypyrrole (Ppy) electrode
The GP/Ppy hybrid electrode was synthesized using an in situ polymerization method.14 Generally, a GP was immersed into a mixture solution of pyrrole (1000 μL, from Sigma-Aldrich), ethanol/DI water/1 M HCl (1 : 1 : 1, v/v/v) and amine p-toluene-sulfonate (pTSNH4, dopant, from Byk). Ammonium persulfate (APS, (NH4)2S2O8, oxidant, from Fisher Scientific) was then added to the mixture solution and the chemical polymerization was carried out at 0–5 °C for 30 min. The as-made GP/Ppy sample was then washed with DI water and dried at 50 °C.
2.1.4.Assembly of GP/MnO2–GP/Ppy asymmetric ECs
The asymmetric ECs were fabricated by making the GP/MnO2 composite as the positive electrode and the GP/Ppy composite as the negative electrode, and finally assembling both electrodes into a coin cell device. The two electrodes were separated by an aqueous electrolyte (1 M Na2SO4) soaked separator (nitrocellulose film).
2.2.Analysis
2.2.1.Microscopic characterization
Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) (FEI XL30, 15 kV) and Raman spectroscopy (Renishaw inVia, excited by a 514 nm He–Ne laser with a laser spot size of ∼1 μm2) were used to characterize the GP. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) data were obtained using a Phi 5300 X-ray Photoelectron Spectrometer with Mg K-alpha X-rays at an accelerating voltage of 15.0 kV (hν = 1253.6 eV) in a chamber maintained at 10−9 Torr. The high-resolution scans of C and low-resolution survey scans were analyzed for each sample at two or more separate locations.
2.2.2.Surface area and pore size measurement
Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) study of GPs. Nitrogen adsorption–desorption isotherms and Barrett–Joyner–Halenda (BJH) pore size distribution were studied by using a surface characterization analyzer (Micromeritics, 3Flex).
2.2.3.Electrical and mechanical measurements
A four-point probe device (Jandel RM3000) was used for electrical measurement of the samples. For conducting the resistance retention test, a two-point probe device was constructed. In this arrangement, copper wires were embedded and connected to GPs with silver paste, which enabled a reliable electrical contact between the copper wires and the GPs. A minimum of three samples were measured to calculate each error bar.
2.2.4.Electrochemical measurements
The electrochemical measurements were carried out with a Gamry instrument (Interface 1000) at room temperature using a three-electrode configuration for the GP and GP/MnO2 electrodes and two-electrode configuration for asymmetric ECs. In the three-electrode configuration, the freestanding GP and GP/MnO2 samples served as the working electrode without the use of any metal support. They were combined with a Ag/AgCl reference electrode and a Pt counter electrode in an electrolyte solution of 1 M Na2SO4. Additives such as 50 mM hydroquinone (HQ) and 50 mM benzoquinone (BQ) were prepared along with 1 M H2SO4 and 30% acetic acid (stabilizer for HQ and BQ) used as the electrolyte. The electrochemical characteristics of ∼0.2 mg GPs, ∼1 mg GP/MnO2 composites (total mass of the electrode with both GPs and MnO2) and ∼5 mg asymmetric ECs (total mass of two electrodes with both GPs and active materials including Ppy and MnO2) were evaluated by cyclic voltammetry, galvanostatic charge–discharge and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy measurements over a frequency range from 105 to 10−2 Hz at a sinusoidal voltage amplitude of 10 mV.
The specific capacitance in the three-electrode system was calculated by using the equation C = It/(ΔVm), and the volumetric capacitance was calculated by a similar expression Cv = ρC, where I is the discharge current, t is the discharge time, ΔV is the operating voltage window, m is the individual electrode mass (including GPs and active materials), and ρ is the density of the electrode.23
To achieve good capacitance performance of the asymmetric electrochemical supercapacitors (ECs), the mass of the two electrodes was balanced based on the following equation: C−ΔV−m− = C+ΔV+m+, where C is the specific capacitance of a single electrode, ΔV is the operating voltage window, and m is the mass of the electrode.
The energy density (E), power density (P) and maximal power density (Pm) were calculated by the expressions: E = Ccell(ΔV)2/2, P = Et−1, and Pm = ΔV2/4Rm, where Ccell is the cell capacitance calculated by Ccell = It/(ΔVm), ΔV is the operating voltage window, t is the discharge time, I is the discharge current, m is the total mass of the two electrodes, and R is the internal resistance calculated from the IR drop of the charge–discharge curve.24
