2.Experimental section
2.1Materials
Commercialized single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs) with a diameter &lt;3 nm and a purity &gt;85.0 wt% were bought from Shenzhen Nanotech Port Co. Ltd, China, and prepared by chemical vapor deposition. Diethylenetriamine (DETA, C.P. pure grade with a purity of &gt;97.0%) was purchased from Aladdin Company. All of the other reagents, including poly(vinylidene fluoride) (PVP), calcium hydride (CaH2), anhydrous ethanol (A.R.) and distilled water, were used as received without further purification.
2.2Preparation of n- or p-type films
A typical procedure for the preparation of the n-type film is described in the following. First, 15 mg of SWCNT was added into 30 mL of mixed ethanol aqueous solution (ethanol/water v/v, 1 : 4) containing 0.15 wt% PVP. Then, the mixture was magnetically stirred for 2 min, and then ultrasonically treated for 60 min with a bath type sonicator. Later, 1 g of DETA was titrated into the above system. After another pen-type ultra-sonication treatment for 30 min, the solution was stirred for 5 h for DETA doping. After that, the mixture was vacuum-filtered, and washed with anhydrous ethanol several times. A solution containing CaH2 (0.2 g) in 10 mL anhydrous ethanol was employed in the washing process as the reducing agent. Finally, the DETA-SWCNT films were vacuum-filtered and dried under vacuum at 80 °C for 40 min, providing a round n-type SWCNT bucky paper ∼13 μm in thickness. For the p-type SWNCT film, 15 mg of SWCNT was dispersed in 30 mL ethanol under a bath-type ultrasonic treatment for 60 min. The mixture was vacuum-filtered, and subsequently dried under vacuum at 80 °C for 40 min.
2.3Fabrication of thermoelectric modules
The thermoelectric modules were made of films of the pristine SWCNT and the DETA-CaH2-SWCNT as p-type and n-type components, respectively. The p- and n-type SWCNT films were cut into a rectangular shape with dimensions of 40 × 10 mm2. The multilayered alternating stacked structure shown in Fig. 5a clearly shows the fabrication strategy. The p- and n-type SWCNT films were electrically connected in series by aluminum foils with a silver adhesive (3 M Company). Insulating layers of polyimide with a thickness of 40 μm were inserted between the p-type and the n-type films to avoid electrical contact. Thermal conduction in parallel was realized along the film plane from the hot end to the cold end along the multilayered films. Copper (Cu) wires were embedded into the multilayered films to detect the temperature gradient (ΔT) between the hot end and cool end of the module. Finally, the modules were achieved by pressing them and laminating with two insulating polyimide films. Ohmic contact was established, as confirmed by I–V curves.
2.4Characterizations
The morphology of the SWCNTs was directly observed using a HITACHI S-4800 scanning electron microscope with an acceleration voltage of 15 kV. Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectra were collected using a spectrophotometer (Perkin-Elmer System 2000 FTIR) with 32 scans in the wavenumber range of 4000–400 cm−1.
2.5Measurements of thermoelectric performance
The films used for thermoelectric measurements of the p-type and n-type SWCNTs were rectangular in shape with dimensions of 40 mm × 10 mm × 13 μm. The electrical conductivities and the Seebeck coefficients at room temperature were measured by a commercial instrument, Film Thermoelectric Parameter Test System (Namicro-F3), made by JiaYiTong Company. During the measurements, a quasi-steady-state mode was adopted. At least five samples were measured, and the average values were used. In the measurements of the module thermoelectric performances, a temperature gradient between 4 K and 110 K was applied across the surface on the top of the modules made up of 2 to 14 couples. The output open circuit voltages were measured directly without any load resistance. In the case where various load resistances were applied, then the output currents and voltages generated at a temperature difference of 55 K were monitored. Thus, the generated output powers were calculated.
