2.Experimental
2.1Synthetic procedures
Si(HSO4)4 (H4)
The reaction was performed in a closed system, comprised of a 3-neck Schlenk reaction flask. One of the joints contained a cold finger maintained at a temperature of approximately −20 °C and another joint was attached to a tube containing an HCl trap. The HCl trap was a liquid mixture of two adducts: diethylmethylamine/aluminum chloride and 2-methylpyridine/aluminum chloride 70 : 30 in weight. HCl trap characterization by 1H NMR is included in the ESI. Sulfuric acid (99.999%, Sigma-Aldrich) and silicon tetrachloride (99%, Sigma-Aldrich) were added to the Schlenk flask under argon atmosphere, in a mole ratio of 4 : 1. An excess of silicon tetrachloride was then added to ensure that no sulfuric acid would remain unreacted. The mixture was kept at room temperature for 24 hours with constant stirring. The constant evolution of bubbles from the mixture indicated the liberation of HCl gas. The final product was a white suspension, consisting of excess silicon tetrachloride and white solid H4 (confirmed by a single MAS 29Si-NMR peak at −118 ppm, (see Section 3.2), and a ratio of S : Si ratio of 4.25 : 1 by ICP-OES). The H4 could be separated out by vacuum filtration, washing and drying.
H4*
A less well characterized and probably oligomeric form of H4 was prepared as the unintended end product of an attempt to make SiCl3(HSO4), which would be designated H1 if it were stable. After interesting (highly conducting but inconsistent) results had been obtained, ostensibly for the latter compound, the following time-dependent synthetic study was made to clarify the source of inconsistencies.
Trichlorophenylsilane (97%, Sigma-Aldrich) was added to sulfuric acid (99.999%, Sigma-Aldrich) under argon atmosphere, in a 1 : 1 mole ratio (with slight excess of the silane). The mixture was kept under constant stirring at ambient temperature in an open vial for different times depending on the preparation: 8 minutes, 32 minutes or 3 h 30 minutes (approximate times). The product, in every case, was a white solid (designated H4*) suspended in a colorless, transparent liquid, which was determined by 1H NMR to be a mixture of benzene and excess starting silane. The samples were chemically quenched after each time interval by reaction with LiNH2 to stop secondary reactions (described in Section 3.3) and the products were examined by 29Si MAS-NMR. The quenching was achieved by carefully adding excess LiNH2 to the reaction mixture under inert atmosphere and quickly homogenizing with mortar and pestle. The results of this study – described in Section 3.3 – show that the target compound SiCl3(HSO4), could only be obtained as a single product by use of very short reaction times and that, without the quenching, evolution towards less chlorinated species and eventually unchlorinated species would occur (in concert with the generation of dimerized and trimerized versions of H4).
MetOxH1 and EtOxH1
Trimethoxyphenylsilane or triethoxyphenylsilane (97%, Sigma-Aldrich) was added to sulfuric acid (99.999%, Sigma-Aldrich) in a 1 : 1 mol ratio under argon atmosphere (with excess of silane). The mixture was kept under constant stirring at ambient temperature for 30 min. The final product is a white, opaque solid (MetOxH1 or EtOxH1) and a colorless, transparent liquid (benzene, excess starting silane and methanol in the case of MetOxH1 or ethanol in the case of EtOxH1, confirmed by 1H liquids NMR). This supernatant was decanted, and the solid was finally washed with hexane and dioxane. The final products were found to be mixtures as shown by solid state NMR (in the case of MetOxH1, see ESI for spectrum) and by the presence of ethanol and methanol in the final liquid. The final structures are suggested to be Si(R)3(HSO4) and Si(R)2Ph(HSO4), where R = CH3O or CH3CH2O. The mixed products are a consequence of the similar labilities of phenyl and alkoxy groups on the silane. Mixtures have the advantage of repressing any transition to ordered crystal states that would eliminate the highly conducting states of interest to our study. An excellent example of this effect is available in the literature of aprotic molecular systems and is reproduced in the ESI.
Me3H1
Trimethylphenylsilane (99%, Sigma-Aldrich) was added to sulfuric acid (99.999%, Sigma-Aldrich) in a 1 : 1 mol ratio under argon atmosphere (with slight excess of silane). The mixture was kept under constant stirring at ambient temperature for 30 min. The final product is a yellow liquid, (the only liquid product of our investigation). NMR: 1Hδ = 0.37, 11.29 ppm; 13Cδ = −0.67 ppm; 29Siδ = 37.34 ppm.
2.2Materials characterization
Powder X-ray diffraction
The XRD of H4 was obtained with a PANalytical X'Pert PRO MRD with a CuKα X-ray source with fixed divergence slits and an X'Celerator detector. The sample was measured from 2 to 90° with 0.25 degree steps and 1.25 s collection time per step. A sample holder designed to protect the sample from outside atmosphere was used, and the sample loading was done inside an Ar glovebox.
Solid-state NMR
The solid-state NMR data were collected using a Bruker 400 MHz AVANCE III spectrometer equipped with a 4 mm double resonance broad-band magic angle spinning probe at 25 °C. 1H and 29Si NMR data for the solid acid H4, were collected by placing the material into a 50 μL Kel-F rotor insert obtained from Bruker, to limit the potential for acid exposure to the probe. 1H MAS NMR spectra of this material were collected using a 4.25 μs π/2 pulse, a recycle delay of 10 seconds and 64 scans. The direct polarization (DP) 29Si spectrum for the solid acid H4 was collected with a 2.3 μs π/6 pulse corresponding to a B1 field of 35 kHz, a recycle delay of 180 seconds, and 1024 scans. 1H → 29Si cross polarization (CP) MAS spectrum for H4 was collected with a recycle delay of 1 second, 32k scans, a contact time of 5 ms, a MAS rate of 5 kHz, and a 1H π/2 pulse of 4.0 μs. The CP condition was optimized by setting the 29Si power for the contact pulse at 35 kHz and optimizing the 1H power for the +1 spinning side band of the Hartmann Hahn match condition (40 kHz). During the contact pulse, the 1H rf power was ramped from 50% to 100%. CP-MAS and DP-MAS data were collected with approximately 60 kHz two pulse phase modulated (TPPM) 1H decoupling16 during data acquisition. All solid-state NMR spectra were collected with a MAS rate of 5 kHz, and were externally referenced to TMS in the solid state using adamantane (1Hδ = 1.63 ppm, 13Cδ = 38.48 ppm) and tetrakis(trimethylsilyl)silane (29Siδ = −9.69 ppm) for 1H, 13C and 29Si spectra respectively.17
Liquids NMR
The liquids NMR spectra were collected using a Varian MR 400 MHz spectrometer equipped with a 5 mm broadband observe probe. The samples were externally referenced to TMS in the liquid state. The 1H spectrum of H2SO4 (99.999%, Sigma-Aldrich) was collected using a 1 s relaxation delay, 8 scans, and a 45° pulse with a duration of 5.30 μs. The 1H spectrum of Me3H1 was collected with a relaxation delay of 1 s, 1 scan and a 45° pulse with a duration of 5.3 μs.
Acid strength characterization
As described below in Section 3.1, initial products containing chlorine were seen to be extremely corrosive, raising questions of acid strength. Using the milder EtOxH1 and Me3H1 acids, an acid strength classification was carried out using the recently systematized N–H proton chemical shift method.15 This is based on combining the acid with the amine base diethylmethylamine, to form the proton transfer ionic liquid for which the acid strength-dependent degree of proton transfer to the nitrogen can be simply determined by 1H–N proton chemical shift.
Conductivities
Proton conductivities were measured using the familiar Nyquist plot analysis of complex impedance relaxation spectra (usually referred to as electrochemical impedance spectroscopy – EIS). Initial measurements, attempted on chlorinated molecules in a piston cylinder cell, failed due to severe corrosion. It was then found that a simple twin probe (platinum in glass sheath) dip type cell, long used in our group for liquid state studies, gave good results after allowing time for the gel-like solids to relax around the electrodes. In this cell, the twin electrodes are mounted in the cap of an in-house made vial with sample volume of about 1 mL. The cap is a Teflon plug top, which is especially suitable for working with quasi solids (see picture of the cell in ESI). The cell constant, controlled by exposed platinum area, was 18 cm−1, determined using standard 0.01 mol L−1 KCl solution. The EIS spectra were collected with a PARSTAT VMP2 using a 10 mV polarization and frequency range of 200 KHz to 10 Hz. Temperatures were varied from ambient to &gt;100 °C using a Yamato Scientific DKN-402 oven.
For low temperature measurements, the cell was mounted in an aluminum temperature smoothing block held in a polystyrene shell, the external temperature of which was manipulated using a dry ice and acetone cooling mixture. Measurements could be made during both slow cool-down and slow warm-up and shown to be the same within measurement error.
Electrochemical tests and applications
(a)Proton transference numbers
These had to be determined indirectly, by first making the lithium ion derivatives of the acids using LiNH2 neutralization of the acid, and applying the Evans–Vincent–Bruce18 potentiostatic polarization method to determine the lithium transference number. Even with the lower conductivities of the lithium salts, only with the least conductive case were we able to stay within the current limitations of our potentiostat. The Li transference number was found to be 1.00.
(b)Electrochemical device applications
We can envisage a variety of applications of our fast protonic conductors in sensor and separator technology where water is excluded from the system to avoid hydrolysis of the silicon–sulfate bond (see Discussion). We could not expect our acids to be really useful in fuel cells that generate water for this reason, but nevertheless carried out a brief study to show that, at least on the short term, fuel cell action could be supported. Fuel cell polarization curves were measured using a PARSTAT 2273 with a scan rate of 20 mV s−1 (H4) and 5 mV s−1 (MetOxH1), with the samples inside a programmable Vulcan furnace (see ESI for MEA schematics). The electrodes used were carbon cloth gas diffusion electrodes (GDE) with a platinum loading of 1 mg cm−2, purchased from Advent. Phosphoric acid 85% was lightly brushed on the surface of the electrodes to aid in the initial gas/electrode/electrolyte interface contact. In one case, the solid electrolyte was simply spread on to the electrodes to fill the spacer gap and then clamped for a few hours, before testing, to allow for even distribution to occur.
