Experimental
Fabrication of hybrid solid electrolytes
The hybrid solid electrolytes were prepared through a mechanochemical route.33 Poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO, 106 g mol−1), NaClO4 (98%, anhydrous) and SiO2 (5–15 nm) were purchased from Aldrich; 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium bis(fluorosulfonyl)imide (Emim FSI, 99.9%, anhydrous) was obtained from Solvionic. PEO, NaClO4 and SiO2 were thoroughly dried at 50 °C and 120 °C in a vacuum for several days before transferring into an Ar-filled glovebox. The ratio of ether-oxygen to Na was 20 : 1, the amount of SiO2 was 5% of the total PEO20–NaClO4 weight, and the amounts of Emim FSI were 50% and 70% of the total PEO20–NaClO4–SiO2 weight. Stoichiometric amounts of PEO, NaClO4, SiO2 and Emim FSI were weighed in an Ar-filled glovebox (O2 &lt; 1 ppm and H2O &lt; 1 ppm) and were ball-milled for 4 h in acetone using a Retsch PM 100 Miller. The resulting uniform slurry was cast on a Teflon plate, dried at 50 °C and was further dried at 100 °C in a vacuum after solvent evaporation. These procedures yielded transparent and free-standing membranes.
Characterization of hybrid solid electrolytes
The phases of the solid electrolytes were examined by X-ray diffraction (Shimadzu XRD-6000), and the surface morphology of the polymer and the cross-sectional morphology of the interface between the electrolyte and cathode were examined by SEM (S-4300 Shimadzu). The hybrid solid electrolyte was deposited on the cathode plate, and then the electrolyte–cathode component after cooling was examined by SEM. The interactions of the hybrid solid electrolyte were evaluated by XPS (Axis Ultra DLD, Shimadzu).
The ionic conductivity of the sample was measured using AC impedance spectroscopy applying a voltage amplitude of 10 mV in a frequency range of 1 MHz and 0.1 Hz using a Solartron system (1260 + 1287). The polymer membrane was sandwiched between two symmetrical stainless-steel blocking electrodes. The measurement of AC impedance spectroscopy was conducted in an Ar-filled glovebox to eliminate the influence of moisture. Conductivity was measured in a temperature range from room temperature to 110 °C. The bulk resistance evolution of the hybrid electrolyte at room temperature was examined via AC impedance spectroscopy.
The voltage stability window of the hybrid solid electrolyte was evaluated via linear cyclic voltammetry of a coin cell with metallic Na as the reference electrode and stainless steel as the working electrode in a potential window from −0.5 V to 7 V vs. Na/Na+ with a sweep rate of 5 mV s−1.
The cation transference number of the hybrid solid electrolyte was determined using the method proposed by Vincent and Bruce.34 In terms of the proposed method, the Na+ transference number was determined by polarizing the Na/hybrid solid electrolyte/Na cell using a small and constant potential that resulted in an initial current and a steady-state current. AC impedance spectroscopy was performed before and after the DC polarization for correcting the change of impedance.
Electrochemical measurements
A prototypical solid-state Na-metal battery consisting of a Na anode, hybrid solid electrolyte and hybrid cathode was assembled in an Ar-filled glovebox. A chunk of metallic Na (99.9%, Aldrich) was cut and pressed into a disc with a diameter of 10 mm and a thickness of ∼1 mm. The hybrid cathode was prepared by mixing an yttrium-doped sodium zirconate–carbon composite, hybrid solid electrolyte, polyvinylidene fluoride and Super P in a weight ratio of 70 : 10 : 10 : 10 in N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone. The slurry was cast on aluminum foil and dried at 100 °C overnight. The hybrid solid electrolytes were cut into pieces with diameters larger than those of the cathode slices, and then were put on the cathode slices and heated at 100 °C for about 12 h to get the electrolyte/cathode components. The Na disc was attached to the other side of the hybrid solid electrolyte in a coin cell. Electrochemical measurements were conducted at 0.05C rate with cut-off voltages of 4.2 and 1.5 V at ambient temperature, and at 0.5C rate at an elevated temperature of 60 °C.
