Results and discussion
Luffa sponge, derived from the fully grown fruit of luffa plants, is available at a very low cost and is abundant in many developing countries within tropical and subtropical regions.29,31 Because of its natural three-dimensional (3D) mat structure, super lipophilicity and hydrophilicity, soft texture and other features, luffa sponge has been extensively used as a material for scouring pads for bathing or kitchen use, foot rugs, car filters and absorbing materials, etc.29,31,32 Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of luffa sponge are shown in Fig. S1a and b. We can see that the luffa sponge fibres are arranged into a multidirectional array forming a natural mat, and the diameter of these fibers is about several hundred micrometers. Furthermore, the surface of these fibres possesses many wavy wrinkles, which is very similar to that of graphene sheets. The luffa sponge is then ground into a powder and characterized by transmission electron microscopy (TEM), and the corresponding results are shown in Fig. S1c and d. Fig. S1d reveals that large quantities of micropores are homogeneously distributed within the luffa sponge, which explains why luffa sponge has been extensively used in absorbing materials. The XRD pattern of the luffa sponge powder is shown in Fig. S2a, and the peak at 2θ = 22.4° corresponds to the (002) crystallographic plane of luffa sponge.33 Moreover, Fig. S2b shows the adsorption experiment of luffa sponge powder for polysulfides (a Li2S4 solution was taken as a representative of polysulfides). For this experiment, 0.8 g luffa sponge powder was added into 5 mL Li2S4 solution, the color of which was originally dark brown. After resting for 30 min, the color of the Li2S4 solution becomes pale yellow, demonstrating that luffa sponge has a certain capacity for adsorbing polysulfides. Therefore, luffa sponge-derived carbon materials are expected to effectively suppress the dissolution of polysulfides. Furthermore, luffa sponge mainly consists of C atoms, O atoms and some other nonmetal and mineral elements, and thus can be readily converted into high additional-value heteroatom-doped carbon material.30 Recently, luffa sponge-derived porous carbon has shown promising applications in microbial fuel cells and supercapacitors.29,34 Therefore, considering the particularity of the microstructure and chemical composition of luffa sponge, we have employed luffa sponge-derived heteroatom-doped porous carbon as an interlayer in Li–S batteries for the first time, to achieve improved performance from an economic and applicability point of view.
Fig. 1a shows a schematic illustration for the formation of the SMPC interlayer. We can see that luffa sponge possesses a continuous 3D macroporous surface which is similar to that of an artificial sponge, containing numerous micrometer-scale channels with a closely packed and parallel arrangement. The luffa sponge was first carbonized under an inert atmosphere. The purpose of the carbonization process is to enrich the carbon content and create initial porosity in the char. The resulting carbonized luffa sponge was then activated with KOH in order to generate abundant porosity, and then washed with HCl and distilled water, to obtain the SMPC powder. Finally, the SMPC powder was rolled into a film using a twin-roller and was punched into SMPC interlayers. Given that KOH is widely used for the chemical activation of carbon materials,7,20 our procedure for obtaining SMPC interlayers is facile, steerable and does not involve expensive chemicals. Furthermore, the raw material is cheap and reproducible. Therefore, the overall synthetic process for the SMPC interlayer is found to be suitable for large-scale production.
(a) Schematic illustration for the formation of the SMPC interlayer. (b) Schematic cell configuration of the Li–S battery with SMPC interlayer.
As shown in Fig. 1b, the as-fabricated SMPC interlayer is placed between the sulfur cathode and the separator in the Li–S battery. The SMPC interlayer not only traps the leaked polysulfide species before they spread to the anode side due to its strong chemical and physical adsorption ability, but can also provide electron pathways and enable the reutilization of intercepted active materials during repeat cycles due to the conductive nature of SMPC. Thus, the obtained SMPC interlayer is expected to significantly enhance the electrochemical performance of Li–S batteries.
SEM and TEM were used to characterize the structures and morphologies of the as-obtained SMPC. Fig. 2a shows a typical SEM micrograph of SMPC, verifying its lamella-like structure with a dimension of several tens of microns. Furthermore, as shown in Fig. 2b, we can see that some holes of various sizes (mesopores and macropores) are found on the surface of SMPC. TEM images of SMPC are shown in Fig. 2c and d, from which we can see that SMPC consists of many disordered carbon layers, between which there are large quantities of white spots beside the macropores, suggesting that abundant micropores/mesopores also exist in the SMPC. This result is in good agreement with the SEM images (Fig. 2a and b). The formation of these pores may be attributed to chemical activation by KOH and/or the inherently hierarchical pore network and complicated micro-/macrostructure of luffa sponge.35 Such a porous carbon framework in SMPC is beneficial to the efficient capture of dissolved polysulfides. The SAED pattern of SMPC displayed in the inset of Fig. 2d further suggests that the carbon matrix is absolutely amorphous. Moreover, the energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) results shown in Fig. S3 reveal the presence and uniform distribution of C, O and S on the surface of SMPC. These oxygen/sulfur-containing functional groups have been reported to be crucial for a long cycling life by effectively restricting polysulfides from escaping into the electrolyte.9,28
SEM images of SMPC (a and b) and TEM images of SMPC (c and d). The inset in (d) is the SAED pattern of SMPC.
After being rolled into sheets, the porous structure of SMPC is still preserved in the SMPC interlayer (as shown in Fig. 3a and b), and only the surface becomes glossy. Fig. 3c exhibits a cross-sectional view of the SMPC interlayer, from which we can infer that its thickness is around 170 μm. A digital photograph of the SMPC interlayer is presented in Fig. 3d, clearly showing its free-standing feature. The SMPC interlayer can be easily bent back and forth many times without breaking, which indicates the flexibility of the as-prepared interlayer.
The surface of the SMPC interlayer (a and b) and the cross-section of the SMPC interlayer (c). Digital photograph of SMPC interlayer (d), with the inset demonstrating its flexibility.
The XRD pattern (Fig. 4a) and Raman spectrum (Fig. 4b) were measured to describe the graphitization of SMPC. In the diffraction pattern, the two wide diffraction peaks located in the regions from 20° to 30° and from 40° to 50° are assigned to the (002) and (100) facets of hexagonal carbon, suggesting that the graphite domain for SMPC is not predominant, as has been previously reported in the literature.22,36,37 The Raman spectrum of SMPC possesses two well-known main peaks at 1352 cm−1 (D-band) and 1591 cm−1 (G-band), which are related to disordered carbon and graphitized carbon, respectively.22,23 It is generally known that the integral intensity ratio of IG/ID is proportional to the degree of crystallinity in carbon materials. The value of IG/ID for SMPC is calculated to be 1.13, due to the partial graphitization of SMPC during the KOH activation process at 800 °C, which is actually favorable for promoting the electronic conductivity of SMPC.
XRD pattern (a), Raman spectrum (b), N2 adsorption–desorption isotherm (c), and pore size distribution profile (d) of SMPC.
The N2 adsorption–desorption isotherm and pore size distribution curve of SMPC derived from the BET measurements are shown in Fig. 4c and d. It is observed that SMPC shows a strong nitrogen adsorption below a relative pressure of P/P0 &lt; 0.1, demonstrating the presence of micropores.14 However, the amount of mesopores in SMPC is limited due to the negligible hysteresis loop in the range of 0.45–0.99P/P0. The specific BET area and total pore volume of SMPC are as high as 3211.2 m2 g−1 and 1.72 cm3 g−1, respectively. In addition, the pore size distribution based on density functional theory (DFT) for SMPC shows the existence of micropores and small mesopores, ranging from 0.6 to 4 nm in size (Fig. 4d). The profile finishes at a pore diameter of under 0.6 nm due to the limitation of the analyzer. The average pore size in SMPC is around 2.15 nm. It has been reported that such a microporous/small-mesoporous material has the unique advantage of absorbing polysulfide ions because the longest chain length among the polysulfide species (Li2S8) is about 2 nm,14 thus promoting the cycling reversibility of Li–S batteries. Furthermore, the high specific surface area and large pore volume of SMPC can offer more reactive positions that are conducive to the reutilization of intercepted active sulfur, because the micropores can facilitate polysulfide electrolyte impregnation and thus provide rapid transport channels for Li ions.38
In order to survey the chemical ingredients and surface properties of SMPC, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) measurements were carried out and the results are displayed in Fig. 5. In the wide-survey XPS spectrum of SMPC (Fig. 5a), three distinct peaks centered at 533.2, 284.7 and 164.3 eV are equivalent to O 1s, C 1s and S 2p, respectively. As measured by XPS, the carbon, oxygen and sulfur content in SMPC are 88.66 at%, 8.62 at% and 2.72 at%, respectively. The XPS results suggest that a sulfur-doped carbon material has been successfully fabricated in this work, and they are consistent with the EDS results (Fig. S3). The high-resolution C 1s, S 2p and O 1s spectra for SMPC are depicted in Fig. 5b–d. It can be seen that the high-resolution C 1s spectrum of SMPC shows four peaks centered at 284.3, 285.7, 286.5 and 289.2 eV, corresponding to C–C/CC, C–O/C–S, CO and O–CO, respectively.26,28 The existence of the C–O/C–S species verifies the effective doping of S into the carbon lattice of SMPC. The high-resolution S 2p spectrum of SMPC can be deconvoluted into four peaks (Fig. 5c), which correspond to, respectively, S–S/S–C bonds at 163.9 and 165.1 eV, and sulfate species at 167.3 and 168.9 eV. The O 1s spectrum of SMPC also proves that oxygen-functional groups exist in the SMPC. These sulfur/oxygen-functional groups are reported to contribute to the enhancement of the affinity and binding energy of polar polysulfides with nonpolar carbon frameworks, thus remarkably improving the cycling stability and rate capability of Li–S batteries.5,9,26–28
(a) XPS spectrum of SMPC. High-resolution spectra of (b) C 1s, (c) S 2p, and (d) O 1s for SMPC.
In order to demonstrate the potential advantages of the SMPC interlayer for suppressing the diffusion of polysulfide ions, the electrochemical performances of Li–S batteries without and with an SMPC interlayer were tested in the coin cells (CR2025). Fig. 6a and b display the cyclic voltammetry (CV) profiles of the Li–S cells without and with an SMPC interlayer at a scan rate of 0.2 mV s−1, respectively. In the cathodic scan, the reduction peak at the higher potential can be allocated to the reduction of sulfur into higher-order soluble polysulfides (Li2Sx, 4 ≤ x ≤ 8), while the peak at the lower potential is equivalent to the further conversion of high-order soluble polysulfides to insoluble Li2S2 and finally to Li2S, respectively.9,22,23 In the succeeding anodic scan, only one broad peak is observed, due to the oxidization of Li2S2 or Li2S into soluble lithium polysulfides.22,23 Comparing Fig. 6a and b, we can clearly see that the cell with the SMPC interlayer shows more obvious reduction peaks at the lower voltage and higher current peaks than the cell without the interlayer, demonstrating the intense redox reaction kinetics and better utilization of active sulfur in the SMPC interlayer-modified cell.39 Furthermore, the anodic and cathodic peaks of the CV profiles for the battery with the SMPC interlayer are overlapping with respect to peak positions and peak currents to a greater extent, again indicating a smaller electrode polarization and superior reversibility than the battery without the SMPC interlayer.40 It also indicates that the special pore structure and surface chemistry of the SMPC interlayer is pretty effective at restricting the diffusion of lithium polysulfides.
Cyclic voltammetry (CV) curves of the Li–S batteries (a) without and (b) with the SMPC interlayer at a scan rate of 0.2 mV s−1. Discharge/charge profiles of the Li–S batteries (c) without and (d) with SMPC interlayer at 0.2C. The sulfur mass loading of each electrode is about 1.5 mg cm−2.
Fig. 6c and d show the discharge/charge profiles of the Li–S cells without and with the SMPC interlayer at 0.2C respectively (1C = 1675 mA g−1). All the specific capacities are calculated using the mass of sulfur. Two typical discharge and single charge voltage plateaus can be clearly observed in both graphs, and can be assigned to the two-stage reaction of sulfur with lithium during the discharge course. This phenomenon agrees well with the results in the CV tests (Fig. 6a and b). In addition, the voltage gap between the charge and discharge plateaus of the cell with the SMPC interlayer is far smaller than that of the cell without the SMPC interlayer, indicating that the insertion of SMPC improves the electrochemical reaction kinetics and decreases the electrode polarization.41 Moreover, a high initial discharge capacity of up to 1544.2 mA h g−1 is delivered by the cell with the SMPC interlayer at 0.2C (with a coulombic efficiency of 97.8%), which is much larger than 298.2 mA h g−1 delivered by the cell without the SMPC interlayer (with a coulombic efficiency of 96%). The lower discharge capacity and coulombic efficiency of the cell without the SMPC interlayer indicates a lower utilization of sulfur and a grievous shuttle effect caused by the diffusion of active sulfur into the electrolyte.23
Fig. 7a displays the cycling performances of the Li–S batteries with and without the SMPC interlayer at 0.2C between 1.7 and 2.8 V. It is evident that the SMPC interlayer can significantly enhance the reversible capacity of the battery. After 200 cycles at 0.2C, the reversible capacity of the specimen with the SMPC interlayer is still as high as 976.6 mA h g−1 with a capacity retention of 63.2%, while the sample without the SMPC interlayer retains a discharge capacity of only 283.2 mA h g−1. Furthermore, the cell without the SMPC interlayer exhibits a recovery process in the first 50 cycles, which may be associated with poor electrochemical contact in the original sulfur electrodes at the beginning of cycling, leading to low sulfur utilization.42 Above all, the markedly improved cycling properties of the cell with the SMPC interlayer may be attributed to the good electrical conductivity, unique microporous/small-mesoporous structure, and moderate S-doping of SMPC, which facilitates rapid electron transfer and enhances the utilization of the active material.
(a) Cycling performances of the Li–S batteries with and without the SMPC interlayer at 0.2C. (b) Rate capabilities of the Li–S batteries with and without the SMPC interlayer at various current rates. (c) The long cycling performance of the Li–S batteries with the SMPC interlayer at 0.5, 1 and 2C. (d) Cycling performance of the Li–S batteries with the SMPC interlayer at 1C. The sulfur mass loading of each electrode for (a–c) and (d) is about 1.5 and 2.5 mg cm−2, respectively.
The rate capabilities of the Li–S cells with and without the SMPC interlayer were further investigated at a current rate from 0.2 to 5C, as shown in Fig. 7b. For the cell with the SMPC interlayer, the discharge specific capacity gradually decreases at 0.2C and retains a capacity of 1425.6 mA h g−1. When the current rate increases to 0.5, 1 and 2C, it delivers a reversible capacity of 1321.2, 1219.7 and 1077.9 mA h g−1, respectively. Even at the higher rate of 5C, the battery exhibits a large capacity of 781.2 mA h g−1, showing a favorable high rate performance. Notably, an outstanding reversible capacity of 1287.1 mA h g−1 is still recovered from the cathode after 70 cycles when the current density is switched back to 0.2C, indicating superior redox stability in the cell with the SMPC interlayer. It can also be observed from Fig. 7b that the cell without the SMPC interlayer displays rapid capacity decay at an identically increasing charge/discharge rate. Furthermore, Fig. S4 shows the discharge/charge curves of the Li–S batteries without and with the SMPC interlayer at various current rates. For the cell without the SMPC interlayer, there are no evident discharge/charge voltage platforms at 1C. However, the curves of the cell with the SMPC interlayer exhibit similar shapes and present classic reaction plateaus even at the high rate of 5C. The outstanding rate performance observed for the battery with the SMPC interlayer may be due to the good electrical conductivity and the strong chemical and physical adsorption of polysulfides by SMPC.
Long-term cycling tests of the Li–S battery with the SMPC interlayer measured at C-rates of 0.5, 1 and 2 were performed, and the results are shown in Fig. 7c. For 1 and 2C, the electrode was firstly discharged/charged at 0.05C for one cycle to activate the cell. The cells deliver initial discharge capacities of 1522.2, 1204.7 and 1009.9 mA h g−1 at 0.5, 1 and 2C, respectively. Even after 500 cycles, the cells at rates of 0.5, 1 and 2C retain capacities of 875.8, 795.5 and 719.9 mA h g−1, respectively. Moreover, at various rates, the cells exhibit capacity fadings of 0.085%, 0.068% and 0.057% per cycle, and the average coulombic efficiencies of the electrodes are 99.3%, 98.8% and 99.3%, respectively.
To further enhance the energy density of the Li–S batteries, a sulfur cathode with a high sulfur mass loading of about 2.5 mg cm−2 was prepared. As shown in Fig. 7d, the electrode was also firstly circulated at 0.05C for 1 cycle to activate the battery. We can see that the cell with the SMPC interlayer exhibits an initial capacity of 894 mA h g−1 and also a reserved capacity of 738.1 mA h g−1 after 250 cycles at 1C. The fading rate is only 0.07% of the initial capacity per cycle, and the average coulombic efficiency of the electrode is about 99.1%. In addition, a sulfur cathode with a sulfur content of 70 wt% was also fabricated, and the cycling performance of this cathode with an SMPC interlayer at 1C is shown in Fig. S5. After activating the battery at 0.05C for 1 cycle, the initial discharge capacity of this sulfur cathode with the SMPC interlayer starts at 941.8 mA h g−1, and a capacity of 946.5 mA h g−1 can still be achieved over 300 cycles at 1C. The excellent long-term cycling properties of the Li–S cell with the SMPC interlayer indicates an observably lowered migration of polysulfides towards the lithium anode.
To experimentally testify the strong adsorption of polysulfides, we investigated the interactions between SMPC powder and polysulfides, and the results are presented in Fig. 8. The Li2S4 solution was initially deep brown in color. 50 mg SMPC powder was added into 5 mL of this Li2S4 solution. After aging for 30 min, the color of the Li2S4 solution turned from the initial brown color to light yellow, indicating that much of the Li2S4 had been effectively adsorbed by SMPC (Fig. 8a). XPS analysis was then performed in order to examine the nature of the interaction between SMPC and Li2S4. The Li 1s spectrum of original Li2S4 displays a single symmetric peak at 55.5 eV (Fig. 8b), whereas upon contact with SMPC, The Li 1s spectrum of SMPC–Li2S4 shifts to a higher binding energy at 56.4 eV, indicating interactions between SMPC and Li2S4 (Fig. 8d). The deconvoluted XPS spectrum of Li2S4 shows two sulfur contributions in the S 2p spectrum at 161.8 and 163.3 eV, which are ascribed to terminal (ST−1) and bridging sulfur (S0B) atoms, respectively (Fig. 8c). This observation is in accordance with the spectra of Li2S4 reported previously.27,43 In contrast, the S 2p XPS spectrum of the SMPC–Li2S4 mixture is quite different, revealing different sulfur environments. The terminal sulfur ST−1 shifts to a higher binding energy by +1.6 eV, indicating a decrease in the electron density on the ST−1. This may be due to its interaction with the positively charged dopant S in SMPC (Fig. 8e). The bridging sulfur is not fitted in Fig. 8e, since its binding energy area overlaps with that of doped sulfur. Above all, the XPS analysis sheds light on the strong chemical interaction between SMPC and polysulfides.
(a) Digital photograph of the Li2S4 solution before and after adding SMPC. High-resolution XPS (b and d) Li 1s and (c and e) S 2p spectra of (b and c) Li2S4 and (d and e) SMPC–Li2S4.
A comparison of the electrochemical performance in Li–S cells between this work and other biochar carbon interlayers is presented in Table S1. We can see that the Li–S cells with the SMPC interlayer show better cycle stabilities and rate capabilities regarding high rate and long-term cycling when compared with previously reported biochar carbon interlayers.21–24,44 This excellent electrochemical performance of the cells with the SMPC interlayer can be mainly ascribed to the merits provided by SMPC, described as follows. (1) The good electrical conductivity can facilitate fast transport of electrons, increase the conductivity of the cathode and improve the utilization of the active material.22,23 To verify this viewpoint, we measured the electronic conductivity of SMPC using a standard four probe method, and the measured value was as high as 1.89 S cm−1. In addition, the extra carbon black in the SMPC interlayer can act as connectors between neighboring carbon sheets to form a continuous electrically conductive network, consequently further increasing the electrical conductivity of the electrode45 (the conductivity of carbon black is 2.65 S cm−1). (2) The microporous/small-mesoporous carbon structure can not only ensure the electrolyte immersion and thus provide rapid transport channels for Li ions,14,38 but can also efficiently capture dissolved polysulfides and decrease shuttling through physical absorption.14,16,21–23 (3) The in situ S-doping can markedly enhance the conductivity of the carbon substrate and further immobilize lithium polysulfides through strong chemical adsorption.26–28
To further understand the effect of the SMPC interlayer in suppressing the migration of polysulfides, the Li–S cells with and without the SMPC interlayer were disassembled after 100 cycles at 0.2C in an argon-filled glove box and postmortem analyses were performed. As is vividly shown in Fig. S6a, for the cell without the SMPC interlayer, there was apparently plenty of yellow precipitate, probably polysulfides, on the surface of the separator and lithium anode. However, for the cell with the SMPC interlayer, no visible yellow substance was present on the separator or lithium anode. This is because the SMPC interlayer can localize the soluble polysulfide species on the cathode side, effectively restraining the shuttling effect of polysulfides. Furthermore, the erosion/degradation of the lithium anode can also be prevented because the SMPC interlayer can restrict the diffusion of polysulfides through the separator and onto the anode side. The above speculation was confirmed by analysing the surface appearance of pristine metallic lithium and that of the corresponding lithium anodes obtained from the cycled Li–S cells with and without the SMPC interlayer. As shown in Fig. S6b and c, the surface of fresh metallic lithium is smooth and compacted. However, the cycled lithium anode from the cell without the SMPC interlayer exhibits a highly coarse and corrosive surface consisting of some flower-like lithium particles, caused by the intense degradation reactions between metallic lithium and dissolved polysulfides during cycling (Fig. S6d and e). In contrast, a relatively smooth and less corrosive surface consisting of lumpy lithium particles is observed for the cycled lithium anode when the SMPC interlayer is used (Fig. S6g and h). The improvement in the lithium surface appearance is in good agreement with the EDS results, as shown in Fig. S6f and i. The intensity of the S signal on the Li surface of the cell without the SMPC interlayer is much stronger than that of the cell with the SMPC interlayer, indicating that more lithium sulfide compounds are precipitated on the surface. The above analysis demonstrates that the SMPC interlayer can effectively reduce the diffusion of polysulfides towards the Li anode, which is beneficial in enhancing the utilization of the active material and extending the lifetime of the lithium anode.
The cycled SMPC interlayer was also thoroughly washed with dimethyl carbonate (DMC) to remove residual soluble species for SEM analysis. SEM images and corresponding elemental mappings of the SMPC interlayer before cycling and after 100 cycles at 0.2C are shown in Fig. S7. An EDX inspection of the SMPC interlayer before cycling shows that elemental sulfur (marked as yellow) is detected. This is because a certain amount of sulfur exists in the original SMPC samples (Fig. S3). However, after 100 cycles, it can be seen that elemental sulfur is distributed uniformly in the SMPC interlayer, further emphasizing the interception and absorption properties of SMPC.
Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements were further carried out to better understand the enhanced electrochemical properties of the Li–S cell with the SMPC interlayer. Fig. 9a and b show Nyquist plots and the equivalent circuit models of the Li–S cells before cycling and when fully charged after 100 cycles at 0.2C, respectively. Before cycling, it is found that the Nyquist plots of both cells consist of a high-to-medium frequency semicircle and an oblique line in the low frequency area. The high-frequency intercept on the real axis Z′ represents the combination resistance Ro of the cell, including the electrode and electrolyte impedances. The semicircle at high frequency to the medium is related to the interface charge-transfer resistance (Rct) against the interfacial electrochemical reaction involved in charge transfer, while the inclined line in the low frequency area is attributed to Warburg impedance (Wo).5,9,23 However, after 100 cycles at 0.2C, two semicircles (Fig. 9b) can be observed from the Nyquist plots of both cells. The newly emerged semicircle in the higher frequency region is associated with the solid–electrolyte interface (SEI) film that is contributed to by the Li2S (or Li2S2) layers on the surface of the electrode (Rs).22,46,47
The Nyquist plots (a) before cycling and (b) when fully charged after 100 cycles at 0.2C for the Li–S cells with and without the SMPC interlayer. Insets are equivalent circuit models.
The fitted Ro, Rs and Rct values of the two Li–S cells based on relevant equivalent circuit models are shown in Table 1. It can be seen that there is a slight change in Ro for the cell with the SMPC interlayer (1.52 Ω before cycling and 1.82 Ω after 100 cycles), and this change is much smaller than that of the cell without the SMPC interlayer (1.69 Ω before cycling and 3.04 Ω after 100 cycles). This strongly suggests that the diffusion of the dissolved polysulfides in the cell with the SPMC interlayer is effectively restricted, leading to the better transportation of lithium ions. Meanwhile, it is obversed that Rct of the cell without the SMPC interlayer (120.6 Ω) is much higher than that of the cell with the SMPC interlayer (44.84 Ω) before cycling, which can be attributed to the improved conductivity after inserting SMPC into the cells. After 100 cycles, the Rct values of all the cells are significantly reduced in comparison with those observed before cycling, which may be caused by the sufficient infiltration of the electrolyte and chemical activation process for the dissolution and redistribution of the active sulfur.48 As for Rs, it can be clearly observed that its value in the cell with the SMPC interlayer (35.03 Ω) is much smaller than that of the cell without the SMPC interlayer (59.86 Ω), further indicating that the SMPC interlayer can efficiently prevent the polysulfide species from shuttling to the lithium anode and growing the Li2S2/Li2S layer.
Impedance parameters simulated from the equivalent circuit fitting of the experimental data
SampleCycle numberRo (Ω)Rs (Ω)Rct (Ω)Without SPMCBefore cycling1.69—120.6After 100 cycles3.0459.8629.73With SPMCBefore cycling1.52—44.84After 100 cycles1.8235.0314.22