Experimental section
Materials and chemicals
Polyvinyl alcohol (PVA, average polymerization degree: 1750 ± 50), borax (Na2B4O7·10H2O), cerium(iv) ammonium nitrate (CAN), acrylic acid (AA), potassium chloride (KCl), urea and glucose were provided by Tianjin Zhiyuan Reagent Co., Ltd (China). All the chemicals were used as received. Activated carbon (AC) powder was supplied by Foshan Nanhai Jusheng Graphite Products Co., Ltd (China).
Grafting of PVA with PAA
The grafting of polyacrylic acid to polyvinyl alcohol was achieved through a catalytic polymerization in the presence of CAN.21 Briefly, 72–720 mg of acrylic acid (AA) was added to 25 mL of aqueous PVA solution (3.5 wt%). Then 1.8 mL H2SO4 (98 wt%) and 5 mL aqueous CAN solution (8.4 mmol L−1) were added dropwise to the obtained PVA/AA mixture at room temperature. The mixture was slowly heated to 45 °C in argon. After reaction for 3 h, the mixture was cooled to room temperature and then poured into acetone to form a white precipitate. The precipitate was purified with acetone in a Soxhlet apparatus for 6 h and then dried at room temperature to obtain the PVA-g-PAA copolymer.
The grafting amount of PAA in the PVA-g-PAA copolymer was determined by acid–base titration using a cresol–thymol blue mixed indicator.22 The indicator was prepared by mixing 40 mL thymol blue (8 mg in mass) aqueous solution and 20 mL cresol (4 mg in mass) aqueous solution. Then 25 mg PVA-g-PAA and 250 μL mixed indicator were dissolved in 25 mL deionized water. The amount of carboxylic acid was determined by adding 10 mM NaOH solution until the color of the resulting mixture turned from light yellow to purple.
Synthesis of self-healable PVA-g-PAA/KCl hydrogel electrolytes
In a typical experiment, the PVA-g-PAA copolymer was dissolved in 0.67 mL hot water (90 °C) to form a transparent solution of 7.5 wt% in concentration. The PVA-g-PAA solution was mixed with 0.33 mL KCl (0.3–3.0 M) aqueous solution under stirring. Later 50 μL of aqueous borax solution (50 mM) was added dropwise to the resulting solution.23,24 After stirring for 2 min, ammonia (25 wt%) was added dropwise to the solution until the resulting mixture reached pH 8. Then the mixture was continuously stirred until a transparent PVA-g-PAA/KCl hydrogel electrolyte was obtained. Hydrogel electrolytes with different concentrations of KCl and PVA-g-PAA were prepared through the same process.
Measurements of ionic conductivity
The conductivity of the hydrogel electrolytes was measured by the impedance spectrum over a frequency range from 1 Hz to 106 Hz. Typically, a piece of the electrolyte was sandwiched between two platinum plates. The area (A) of the electrolyte was 1.2 cm2 and the distance (d) between the two plates was 0.07 cm. Bulk resistance R (Ω) was determined by the intercept with the real axis. Ionic conductivity σ (mS cm−1) was calculated by the following formulaσ = 1000 × d/(R × A)
Assembly and electrochemical measurement of the self-healing capacitor prototype
A piece of the PVA-g-PAA/KCl electrolyte was cut into a plate of 10 mm × 12 mm × 1.0 mm in size. Activated carbon (AC) electrodes were prepared by mixing activated carbon powder, acetylene black and polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) in the mass ratio of 70 : 20 : 10. The resulting mixture was pressed into carbon films of 30 μm in thickness. Then the two sides of the electrolyte were coated with the carbon films to assemble a capacitor prototype. The assembled capacitor was tightly covered with two platinum strips by a clip. The cyclic voltammetry (CV) and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements of the capacitor were conducted on a CHI 660e electrochemical workstation. The galvanostatic charge/discharge (GCD) tests were performed on a Neway battery tester (CT-4008-5V50mA-S1) between 0 and 1.0 V at the current density of 0.5–10 mA cm−2.
Characterization
Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR) spectra were recorded on a Shimadzu IRaffinity-1s spectrometer. The mechanical properties of the electrolytes were measured with a highly sensitivity microelectromechanical balance (DCAT-21, Dataphysics). Fluorescence microscopic observation was conducted on an Olympus BX53.
