2.Experimental
2.1.Preparation of polyporous nanofiber membranes
The CA/PLLA polyporous composite nanofiber membranes were prepared by electrospinning at an ambient temperature with humidity of 20%. The chemical structure of CA and PLLA is shown in Fig. 1. On the basis of previous study, the optimized material ratio between CA and PLLA for the preparation of nanofiber membranes was identified as 1 : 1 (weight ratio) in this study. First, 3 g of the pre-weighed CA powder (average molecular weight of 3 × 104 g mol−1, Aldrich Chemical Co., USA) and PLLA powder (average molecular weight of 3 × 104 g mol−1, Shandong medical Instrument Institute Co., China) were homogeneously dissolved in the 20 mL mixed solvent system of N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF)/1,4-dioxane (DOX) (1 : 1, w/w) with magnetic stirring at the temperature of 40 °C for 24 h. During the electrospinning process, the CA/PLLA solution was loaded into a dual syringe pump and injected through a plastic needle with a flow rate of 0.5 mL h−1. A positive high voltage of 18 kV was applied to the needle tip and the distance between the spinneret and a flat plate collector covered with aluminium foil (rotating rate of 100 rpm approximately) was 18 cm, respectively. The whole electrospinning process took about 14 h. Then, the resulting CA/PLLA nanofiber membranes were dried in a vacuum oven at 60 °C for 12 h to remove the residual solvent and transferred to a dry box for further use. For the preparation of the CA/PLLA/HNT composite nanofiber membranes, 15 mg of HNTs (Hebei Mineral Instrument Institute Co., China) were added into the CA/PLLA solution, and mixed for 30 min with ultrasonic treatment. Then, the CA/PLLA/HNT composite nanofiber membranes were prepared by electrospinning under the same technical parameters.
The chemical structure of CA (a) and PLLA (b).
2.2.Preparation of gel polymer electrolytes (GPEs)
Polyporous nanofiber membranes were punched into several small discs with a diameter of 22 mm. Some small discs were stacked together to form the skeleton structure of GPEs, these precursors were vacuum-dried at 50 °C for 6 h and transferred into an argon filled glove box (moisture level &lt; 10 ppm). The GPEs were prepared by immersing precursors in 1 M lithium hexafluorophosphate (LiPF6)/ethylene carbonate (EC) : dimethyl carbonate (DMC) (1 : 1, v/v) for about 24 h at room temperature, the saturated GPEs were used after the removal of the excess liquid electrolyte by filter paper for the measurement of electrochemical properties. For comparison, commercial Celgard® 2500 microporous monolayer membranes were used as a separator for LIBs.
2.3.Characterization
The surface morphology of electrospinning the composite nanofibers membranes was examined using scanning electron microscopy (SEM, Hitachi S-4700, Japan) at an accelerating voltage of 20 kV. The diameter range of the nanofiber membranes was measured by image visualization software ImageJ 1.34s (National Institutes of Health, USA), and about 200 nm fibers were investigated to calculate average fiber diameter. Verification of hollow tubes structure of HNTs and nanofiber membranes with HNTs were characterized using transmission electron microscopy (TEM, Hitachi H800, Japan). The structure was investigated by FTIR spectra (Spectrum One, PerkinElmer Instruments). The thermal stability of the films was monitored using thermogravimetric analyzer (TA, Q50, USA). The thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) was performed under a dry nitrogen atmosphere with a heating rate of 10 °C min−1 from 30 to 600 °C. Structure and the crystallization properties of the samples were investigated using an X-ray diffractometer (XRD, 2500VB2+PC, Rigaku Corporation, Japan). Tensile tests of the nanofiber membranes were conducted using a tensile testing machine (Instron 1121, UK). Ten samples were tested for each type of nanofiber membrane, and the average and standard deviation values were calculated. The dimension of the samples was 5 cm × 1 cm × 0.3 cm (length × width × thickness). The speed of the crosshead was 2 mm min−1. The N-butanol uptake method was employed to calculate the porosity of the electrospun membranes.32 Saturated electrolyte uptake of stacked electrospun membranes was measured after the immersion process. Saturated electrolyte uptake (A) of nanofiber membranes was measured and calculated by eqn (1):1A (%) = (W1 − W0)/W0 × 100%where W0 and W1 are the mass of the dry and the saturated membrane, respectively.23 All the electrochemical properties were measured on an Autolab PGSTAT 302N (Metrohm) at room temperature. The ionic conductivity was determined by AC impedance spectroscopy in the range of 0.1 Hz to 100 kHz using the cell inserted GPEs into two parallel stainless steel (SS) discs. The ionic conductivity could be calculated by eqn (2):2δ = L/(Rb × S)where δ is the ionic conductivity, Rb the bulk resistance, L and S are the thickness and area of the films, respectively.33 The electrochemical stability window was examined using the method of linear sweep voltammetry in the cell Li/GPE/SS at a scan rate of 1 mV s−1, potential voltage ranging from 1 V to 8 V. The lithium-ion transference number was measured using the method of chronoamperometry (CA) in the cell Li/GPE/Li with a polarization voltage of 5 mV.34 Impedance spectra were obtained by scanning in the frequency range of 0.1 Hz to 200 kHz using a symmetrical Li/GPE/Li cell. The charge/discharge performance of the Li/GPE/LiCoO2 cells was galvanostatically measured on a LAND CT2001A battery tester in the potential range of 2.7–4.2 V at current densities of 0.1C. The C-rate capability was also measured at current densities of 0.1, 0.2, 0.5, 1C rates. The biodegradation behaviour of CA/PLLA and CA/PLLA/HNT nanofiber membranes were analysed in a composting environment, and the composting medium was prepared by blending chicken manure and sawdust in a weight ratio of 50 : 50. The compost was placed in a plastic container and water was added into the composting medium until the moisture content reached about 50%, and the water should be added periodically to maintain the moisture content.35 Dried nanofiber membranes wrapped by non-woven and non-degradable polypropylene bags with high porosity were inserted inside the composting medium for microbial degradation tests, and the weights of the dried specimens were recorded as a function of biodegradation time.
