5.Conclusions
The polymer electrolyte is the key component in lithium polymer batteries and serves as both the separator and the electrolyte. To be successfully used as a lithium polymer electrolyte, a polymer electrolyte should possess certain properties, namely, an ionic conductivity that approaches 10−4 S cm−1 at ambient temperature, a Li+ transference number that is close to unity, great mechanical strength, an electrochemical window up to 4–5 V vs. Li/Li+, and excellent chemical and thermal stability.
A solid polymer electrolyte (SPE) comprising a polymer matrix and a lithium salt is also called a dry-SPE. Dry-SPEs usually possess very low ionic conductivity at ambient temperature, which excludes them from practical applications. The most commonly used approaches to increase the ionic conductivity of dry-SPEs are the modification of the polymer matrix by copolymerization, crosslinking, blending, etc. The ionic conductivity can be increased by 1–2 orders of magnitude with modified polymer matrices. The attempt to increase the ionic conductivity of dry-SPEs by increasing the salt concentration (in excess of 50 wt% salt) leads us into the area of polymer-in-salt electrolytes. An ionic conductivity of up to 10−4 S cm−1 at ambient temperature could be achieved. Ion transport in polymer-in-salt systems is considered to be associated with a high degree of ionic aggregation in the polymer-in-salt electrolyte. An SPE composed of a polymer matrix and a lithium salt is a so-called bi-ionic conductor. In bi-ionic conductors, the migration of anions toward the anode causes serious concentration polarization. The immobilization of anions in the polymer is the most common approach for creating a single-ion conductor. However, the ionic conductivities of single-ion conducting polymer electrolytes are generally lower than those of dual-ion conducting systems because of the decreased number of mobile carrier ions. In recent years, an alternative method has been employed, in which an anion receptor is introduced into electrolytes to increase their ionic conductivity and/or cation transference number. In these systems, although anions are trapped by an anion receptor, the interaction between the anion and anion receptor promotes the further dissociation of lithium salts, which might lead to an increase in both ionic conductivity and Li+ transference number at the same time.
The properties of the lithium salt affect the performance of rechargeable lithium polymer batteries. In the field of the development of new types of lithium salts, borate salts, phosphate salts, functionalized sulfonate and imide salts, dilithium salts, etc. have been investigated and displayed excellent properties when employed in polymer electrolytes. In the future, the ideal lithium salt should be inexpensive, easy to prepare and environmentally friendly. It should also fulfill the electrochemical requirements.
The strategy of adding inorganic fillers to SPEs is a very effective way of increasing the ionic conductivity as well as the mechanical and electrochemical stability of SPEs. Ceramic fillers play the roles of crosslinking centers and centers of Lewis acid–base interactions, thus influencing the conductivity of composite systems. Fillers can be inert or active ceramic materials, carbon materials, or cellulose, etc. However, the high surface energy of inorganic nanoparticles usually causes particle agglomeration and phase separation in polymer matrices, especially with nano-sized fillers. The surface modification of inorganic nanoparticles is very effective for improving their dispersibility and affinity with organic compounds.
Gel polymer electrolytes (GPEs) are obtained by incorporating a certain amount of a liquid plasticizer and/or solvent into the polymer–salt system. Plasticizers can be low-molar-mass organics, organic solvents or ionic liquids (ILs). Among these, ionic liquids are a very promising type of plasticizer owing to their inherent properties: high chemical and thermal stability, non-flammability, negligible volatility, and especially high electrochemical stability and hydrophobicity. Recently, a polymeric lithium salt combined with an IL exhibited an ionic conductivity higher than 10−4 S cm−1 at room temperature. GPEs based on polymeric ionic liquids (PILs) exhibit high conductivity of lithium ions, high electrochemical stability and good interfacial stability toward lithium metal, which makes them very promising polymer electrolytes for applications in lithium metal batteries. Several approaches have been used to prepare these GPEs, including casting methods, in situ polymerization methods, extraction–activation methods, phase inversion methods, electrospinning technology, and foaming technology, etc. In the preparation of a porous polymer membrane, the porosity, pore size, and thickness of the membrane and its ability to hold a liquid electrolyte are properties that need to be taken into consideration. Although the ionic conductivity of GPEs is generally of the order of 10−3 S cm−1, their low mechanical strength and poor interfacial properties are still obstacles to their application in commercial lithium polymer batteries. In addition to chemical or physical crosslinking of the system and physical support by polyolefin membranes, another efficient way to improve the mechanical strength, as well as the transport properties and electrochemical properties, is the addition of inorganic fillers. In these composite GPEs, Li+ transfer predominantly occurs in space charge layers at the boundaries of ceramic grains dispersed in liquid electrolytes.
