Conclusions
We have designed and synthesized PPOs carrying polycationic side chains via heptyl spacer units with the aim to prepare high-performance AEMs. Starting from bromoheptyl functionalized PPO, the side chains were successively built up by reactions with 1,6-dibromohexane and different ternary diaminoalkanes, relying on efficient Menshutkin reactions. In order to clarify the structure–property relationships of these materials we systematically varied the number of methylene units in between the QA cations, the membrane IEC and the number of QA cations per side chain, respectively. SAXS results showed that the characteristic separation distance markedly increased with the number of QA cations per side chain, while the two other parameters gave only a moderate increase. The QA cations of the side chains had to be separated by at least 4 methylene units in order to maximize the conductivity by avoiding counter-ion condensation. The conductivity increased only moderately with the number of QA cations up to three, whereafter the value increased markedly when increasing from 3 to 4. The reason may be that the presence of the spacer already induced an efficient phase separation when the side chain contains one QA cation. The AEMs reached very high OH− conductivities, up to 160 mS cm−1 with tetra-QA side chains. Side chains with less than 4 methylene units in between the QA cations were activated for Hofmann elimination and degraded quickly in 1 M NaOH at 60 °C. It is possible that the increased proximity of the OH− and QA cations in these materials because of counter-ion condensation contributed to the degradation. Side chains with 4 or more methylene units in between the QA cations were very stable and showed no degradation by NMR and TGA analysis after storage in 1 M NaOH up to at least 90 °C. The present work demonstrated that a molecular architecture with poly-QA side chains attached via flexible spacer units affords AEMs that combine efficient phase separation, high alkaline stability and OH− conductivity at moderate water uptake, provided that the side chains are properly designed to avoid Hofmann eliminations and counter ion condensation.
