2.Experimental section
2.1.Materials
Bis(trifluoromethanesulfoneimide) lithium salt (LiTFSI) (Tokyo Chemical Industry Co. LTD), methyl methacrylate (MMA) (Sigma-Aldrich), 2-hydroxyethyl methacrylate (HEMA) (Sigma-Aldrich), (3-chloropropyl)trimethoxysilane (Sigma-Aldrich), propylene carbonate (PC) (Sigma-Aldrich), 1-methylimidazole (Sigma-Aldrich), and potassium persulfate (Sigma-Aldrich) were used as-purchased without further purification.
2.2.Preparation of PMMA nanoparticles
PMMA nanoparticles were synthesized by soap-free emulsion polymerization in a three-necked flask equipped with a reflux condenser and a magnetic stirrer. In a typical reaction, 20 mL of MMA monomer and 200 mL of water were added to the three-necked flask and magnetically stirred. The solution was heated to boiling for 5 min, then 0.25 g of potassium persulfate powder was added. After reaction for an hour, 4 mL of 2-hydroxyethyl methacrylate (HEMA) monomer was added to the mixture and the reaction was stopped after 2 hours. The white PMMA nanoparticles formed were filtered, washed with DI water, and dried in air. The weight-average molecular weight (Mw) and number-average molecular weight (Mn) are 180 000 and 125 000 g mol−1, respectively.
2.3.Synthesis of IL-decorated PMMA-IL-TFSI
The IL precursor (1-methyl-3-trimethoxysilaneimidazolium chloride, IL-Cl) was synthesized by the reaction between 1-methylimidazole and (3-chloropropyl)trimethoxysilane at 80 °C for 2 days. The solution was purified via liquid extraction in ether and the solvent was finally evaporated. To graft the IL-Cl precursor to PMMA nanoparticles, a simple water-based chemical treatment was applied. PMMA nanoparticles were dispersed in DI water. Then, 1.5 times excess IL-Cl precursor was added dropwise to the aqueous suspension and the mixture was heated at 80 °C for 12 h with continuous stirring. Subsequently, water in the mixture was evaporated, and the resultant IL-Cl decorated PMMA-IL-Cl nanoparticles (denoted as PMMA-IL-Cl nanoparticles) were washed with water, and collected by centrifugation. The sample was finally freeze-dried to remove the final trace of the solvent.
An ion-exchange reaction was followed at room temperature to substitute the chloride ion with the bis(trifluoromethanesulfoneimide) (TFSI) anion. First, 4 g of PMMA-IL-Cl nanoparticles were dispersed in 100 mL of water and 8 g of the LiTFSI salt was also dissolved in water separately. LiTFSI solution was then added to the solution of PMMA-IL-Cl nanoparticles with continuous stirring. Due to the hydrophobic nature of TFSI anions, PMMA-IL-TFSI nanoparticles immediately separated from the water phase and settled at the bottom of the reaction vessel. The resultant PMMA-IL-TFSI nanoparticles were eventually collected from the solution by repeated washing with DI water and centrifugation, and were finally dried.
2.4.Preparation of PMMA-IL-TFSI/LiTFSI mixtures
PMMA-IL-TFSI and the LiTFSI salt were dissolved in PC separately. The desired amount of PMMA-IL-TFSI solution was added to 1 M LiTFSI/PC solution, and the mixtures were sonicated to form a homogeneous phase. The samples were subsequently dried at 70 °C for 3 days in a vacuum oven to remove the final trace of water. The water content of the prepared mixtures was less than 20 ppm as determined by Karl–Fischer titration. The state of the mixtures is in the form of a gel. Scheme 1 illustrates the procedure used to prepare PMMA-IL-TFSI/LiTFSI mixtures.
Procedure used to prepare PMMA-IL-TFSI/LiTFSI mixtures.
2.5.Characterization
The photomicrographs of PMMA and PMMA-IL-TFSI nanoparticles were taken by transmission electron microscopy (TEM) with a JEM 100CXII transmission electron microscope (JEOL, US). Thermogravimetric (TGA) analysis of SIPE samples with different contents of PMMA-IL-TFSI was performed under a nitrogen atmosphere at a rate of 10 °C min with a Perkin Elmer UNIX/TGA7 system. A Fourier transform infrared spectrophotometer (FTS6000, Bio-Rad, US) was used to confirm the successful tethering of the IL on PMMA nanoparticles. Particle size distribution was measured with a Brookhaven 90Plus/BI-MAS Multi Angle Particle Size Analyzer. Steady shear rheological experiments were performed with a stress-controlled rheometer. The GPC system was used for the determination of the molecular weight of synthesized PMMA. The water content of the electrolytes was determined by Karl–Fischer titration.
The electrochemical stability window was examined using an Autolab PGSTAT100 electrochemical workstation at a scan rate of 1 mV s−1. The temperature dependence of ionic conductivity was determined by impedance spectroscopy measurements, using the same electrochemical workstation within a temperature range of 20 °C to 90 °C with an incubator. Briefly, 10 mV was applied to two stainless steel electrode cells (loaded with the PMMA-IL-TFSI/LiTFSI SIPEs) with a frequency range from 100 kHz to 10 Hz. tLi+ was also studied using the same electrochemical workstation at room temperature. A fixed protocol was used in the galvanostatic cycling test, wherein the cell was periodically charged and discharged at a constant current density of 0.2 mA cm−2 with a Neware CT-4008 battery tester. The Neware CT-4008 battery tester was also used for galvanostatic polarization and cycling studies. LTO spinel nanopowder with a particle size &gt;100 nm, Super P carbon black, and PVDF (polyvinylidene difluoride), were mixed in a 80 : 10 : 10 weight ratio in N-methylpyrrolidone (NMP). The copper foil was coated with the viscous slurry using a film-casting doctor blade (MTI Corporation). The obtained electrode films with an active material loading of around 2 mg cm−2 were dried at 90 °C for 12 h in a vacuum oven before using them to fabricate the coin cells. Charge–discharge tests were carried out over a voltage range of 1.0–3.0 V at room temperature (25 °C) with a cell test instrument after the cells were allowed to stay for 8 h. The current rate was determined by using the nominal capacity of 175 mA h g−1 for the Li/Li4Ti5O12 cell.
