Conclusion
A renewable graphene-like nitrogen-doped carbon nanosheet (RGNC-NS) has been successfully fabricated by using carbonization and auto-activation simultaneously followed by ultrasonic-assisted liquid exfoliation from layered shrimp shells. In our method, carbonization of nitrogen-rich shrimp shells demonstrated the successful incorporation of 8.75 wt% nitrogen into the RGNC-NS, and the natural laminated calcium carbonates acting as template and auto-activation agent generated hierarchical pore distributions. Additionally, the ultrasonic-assisted liquid exfoliation in NMP led to a high-aspect-ratio (∼5 nm thick) graphene-like few-layer structure with a large specific surface area (1946 m2 g−1). These integrated characteristics of the RGNC-NS resulted in high conductivity (7.8 S cm−1) and good surface wettability with the electrolyte. Using the RGNC-NS as the supercapacitor electrode, a high specific capacitance of 322 F g−1 at 0.5 A g−1 was obtained in 6 M KOH electrolyte. More importantly, the high-aspect-ratio graphene-like structures with a good integration of the high specific surface area and high nitrogen-doped content effectively enhance ionic/electronic transports and surface charge storage capacity, a feature which is still desired in the synthesis of advanced nitrogen-doped supercapacitor electrodes. These characteristics result in a significant capacitance contribution from the double-layer capacitance. The RGNC-NS-SC exhibits an ultrahigh rate capability of 75% (maintaining 241 F g−1 at 100 A g−1), and a long cycle life of 98.3% capacitance retention after 20 000 cycles at 10 A g−1. In addition, the RGNC-NS-SC in an IL mixture electrolyte exhibits integrated high energy–power properties at an energy density of 30 W h kg−1 corresponding to a power density of 64 200 W kg−1, coupled with a good cyclic stability of 93.2% capacitance retention after 8000 cycles at 5 A g−1. These results provide our RGNC-NS with the best supercapacitive performances compared with the state-of-the-art nitrogen-doped carbons. The normalized packaged RGNC-NS-SC partly integrates the merits of the high-energy density of a battery, and the ultrahigh-power delivery and cyclic stability of an electrolytic capacitor. Moreover, the synthesis strategy described in this study can be potentially used to prepare other high-performance nitrogen-doped carbon nanosheets from other layered crustacean shells for supercapacitors.
