Results and discussion
By a cheap and easily scalable aqueous co-precipitation route, precursors with different molar ratios (TiO2, Sn0.8Ti0.2O2, SnO2) were obtained. After typical hydrogen plasma reduction at 400 °C, the synthesized black samples were labeled B-TiO2, B-STO2, and B-SnO2, respectively. For comparison, the (Sn, Ti)O2 solid solution precursors were sintered at 400 °C for 2 h in ambient atmosphere. The resulting white samples were denoted W-TiO2, W-STO2, and W-SnO2. Detailed synthetic procedures are described in the Experimental Section. The phase structure of the as-prepared samples was examined by XRD. The diffraction pattern of B-SnO2 (Fig. 1a) shows the characteristic peaks belonging to SnO2 (JCPDS no. 41-1445). The spectrum of B-STO2 shows no peak splitting, and its positions are shifted to rutile TiO2 with the increasing Ti composition (Fig. S1a and b). Moreover, B-STO2 follows Vegard's law exactly, indicating the formation of a rutile (Sn, Ti)O2 solid solution (Table S2). The solid solution means a homogeneous composition at atomic level, which is demonstrated to be beneficial for structural stability during the charge–discharge process. The broadened peaks are correlated with the disordered shell after the hydrogen plasma reduction and a nanoparticle size around 9 nm, which is consistent with the following TEM observation. As seen in Fig. 1a, without Sn4+ addition, only anatase is observed, which is in agreement with Hu et al. and suggests that anatase is more stable at the nanometer scale.25 In addition, the narrower full width at half maximum (FWHM) of the XRD peaks in Fig. 1b indicates that W-STO2 has a larger average crystallite size than B-STO2. When the temperature of the hydrogen plasma reduction increases to 500 °C, there are noticeable diffraction peaks corresponding to Sn (Fig. S1c), indicating that part of the SnO2 is reduced to metallic Sn. This verifies the powerful reduction ability of the hydrogen plasma treatment. The effective reduction converts surface Ti4+ into Ti3+ and Sn4+ into Sn0 by introducing H doping and oxygen vacancies, resulting in a black color. The dark color suggests excellent visible light absorption.
(a) XRD patterns of B-SnO2, B-STO2, and B-TiO2, and standard XRD patterns of tetragonal rutile phase SnO2 (JCPDS no. 41-1445) and anatase TiO2 (JCPDS no. 21-1272). (b) XRD patterns of W-SnO2, W-STO2 and W-TiO2. (c) UV-Vis absorption spectra of B-STO2 and W-STO2, inset: digital photographs of B-STO2 (left) and W-STO2 (right). (d) 1H NMR spectra of B-STO2 and W-STO2.
Fig. 1c displays the diffuse reflectance spectra of W-STO2 and B-STO2 for comparison. Both show a steep increase in the absorption at wavelengths shorter than 400 nm induced by the intrinsic bandgap absorption of the (Sn, Ti)O2 solid-solution. B-STO2 shows a significant increase of the visible and infrared light absorption at wavelengths longer than 400 nm, much superior to W-STO2. The enhanced visible light absorption is attributed to the localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) effect, which is analogous to the reported results for noble metal (Ag, Pt, Au) modification.26–28
1H NMR measurements were conducted to identify the role of hydrogenation in black B-STO2 induced by hydrogen plasma reduction, as shown in Fig. 1d. Both black B-STO2 and white W-STO2 show a main peak centered at the chemical shift of 5.5 ppm, which is the main type of bridging proton in rutile TiO2.29 The larger line width in B-STO2 is caused by the formation of an amorphous layer with H incorporation during the hydrogen plasma reduction process.23 Additionally, black B-STO2 displays two extra peaks at chemical shifts of 0.8 ppm and 0.3 ppm compared to white W-STO2. The sharp peak at 0.8 ppm is attributed to the dynamic exchange between 1H (fast motion) in different environments, indicating rapid isotropic diffusion and exchange which may promote Li-ion transport.30 The shoulder peak at 0.3 ppm demonstrates another bridging hydrogen position in the interstitial sites.31
The morphologies of the B-STO2 were observed using a SEM and TEM. Fig. 2a and b clearly illustrate a dispersion of small size (9 nm) with narrow size distribution. In contrast, W-STO2 has a larger particle size of about 25 nm, as can be seen from the TEM image in Fig. S2. These TEM observation results support the results from the XRD measurements. Semi-quantitative chemical analysis by scanning transmission electron microscope-energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (STEM-EDX) of B-STO2 gives a Sn/Ti ratio close to 4, in line with the raw material ratio. The EDX elemental analysis for the area mode of B-STO2 is presented in Fig. S3, revealing the uniform distribution of Sn and Ti metal within the black samples.
(a) Characteristic SEM and (b) TEM images of B-STO2 showing a uniform particle size of about 9 nm, inset: the distribution of the sizes of nanoparticles, (c) HRTEM image of W-STO2 and its corresponding SAED pattern. (d) HRTEM image of B-STO2 and its corresponding SAED pattern. In (d), a short-dashed curve in red is used to outline a part of the interface between the crystalline core and the amorphous outer layer of B-STO2.
To verify the microstructure change after hydrogen plasma reduction, B-STO2 and W-STO2 were examined by high resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM). As shown in Fig. 2d, black B-STO2 with a hydrogen-stabilized amorphous shell coating a highly crystalline core structure can be clearly observed, a short-dashed curve in red is used to outline a part of the interface between the crystalline core and the amorphous outer layer. The measured interplanar spacing of 0.33 nm is in agreement with the d-spacing of the (110) lattice plane of the rutile phase. The coated amorphous layer has a thickness of ∼1 nm, creating a highly conductive layer over the entire particle. On the other hand, no disordered surface layer was observed for W-STO2 in Fig. 2c. The ring-like mode in the selected-area electron diffraction (SAED) pattern confirms the presence of polycrystalline SnO2, which is consistent with the XRD result.
To further understand the nature of the structure changes after hydrogen plasma reduction, Raman scattering (Fig. S4) of the samples was recorded. For air annealed W-STO2, there are three Raman active modes (B1g + Eg + A1g) for the rutile phase with frequencies at 133.4, 425.6, and 611.7 cm−1 in accordance with previous work.32,33 The broad band near 253.9 cm−1 is a second-order phonon. All the peaks of B-STO2 become broader and shift to a lower wavenumber, indicating that the disordered surface broke down the initial symmetry structure of the (Sn, Ti)O2 solid-solution after hydrogen plasma reduction.
Furthermore, XPS was used to investigate the elemental composition and surface chemical status of B-STO2 and W-STO2 for comparison. The main carbon peak was adjusted to 284.6 eV, due to the adventitious hydrocarbon from the XPS instrument itself. W-STO2 with Sn 3d5/2 and 3d3/2 peaks centered at binding energies of 487.5 and 495.9 eV are consistent with the typical pattern of Sn4+–O bonding. For the B-STO2 sample, a negative shifting indicating a lower electron density around the Sn atom is obviously observed as compared with the Sn 3d spectrum of the W-STO2. Small Sn 3d peaks located at around 492.8 and 484.5 eV are observed, indicating the existence of Sn0. However, tiny Sn nanodots are highly appreciated in high performance Sn or SnO2 anodes. Fig. 3b displays the XPS spectra for Ti 2p from 454.0 to 468.0 eV. As can be seen, the symmetric Ti 2p peaks of W-STO2 at 458.7 and 464.6 eV indicate that the stoichiometric (Sn, Ti)O2 solid solution has an unchanged Ti4+ transition state with a low concentration of defects.34 After the hydrogen plasma reduction, an obvious negative shift can be observed in the XPS spectrum of B-STO2, demonstrating that a reduction reaction has happened. This broad peak can be deconvoluted into two peaks centered at 458.7 and 457.9 eV, demonstrating the existence of Ti3+ (Fig. S5).20 The O 1s peaks at 529.9 and 530.9 eV in air annealed W-STO2 are typically assigned to Ti–O, Sn–O bonds. The slightly broader O 1s peak in B-STO2 is due to a small peak at about 531.8 eV from the Ti–OH bonds, similar to the reported results,35 which confirms the formation of a hydroxyl group on the (Sn, Ti)O2 surface after hydrogen plasma reduction.
XPS spectra of B-STO2 and W-STO2: (a) Sn 3d spectra, (b) Ti 2p spectra, (c) O 1s spectra. (d) EPR spectra of B-STO2 and W-STO2.
EPR is employed to detect paramagnetic species containing unpaired electrons and has been widely used to characterize the existence of Ti3+ and oxygen vacancies. As indicated in Fig. 3d, B-STO2 shows a rather strong response from Ti3+ spins, while W-STO2 only possesses a very weak form of resonance at a g-value of 2.02 caused by surface absorbed O2− from the air. The above XPS results are consistent with the EPR results, verifying the existence of the Ti3+ and oxygen vacancies.
Both the simulations based on first-principle theoretical calculations and experimental measurements have demonstrated that black B-STO2 becomes n-type conductive with hydrogen incorporation, where the H atoms reside at the oxygen vacancies. To experimentally investigate the conductivity of black B-STO2 and W-STO2, these two powder samples were pressed into thin slices (∼0.2 g samples, Φ = 13 mm, thickness d ∼ 0.5 mm) by a powder tablet compressing machine and then measured by the Van der Pauw method with an Accent HL5500. The electrical conductivities of both the samples were calculated, as shown in Fig. 4a. The electrical conductivity of the B-STO2 sample is 35.7 μS cm−1, which is an improvement of over two orders of magnitude higher than the 0.1 μS cm−1 for the W-STO2 sample.
(a) Electrical conductivity bar graph of B-STO2 and W-STO2 samples. (b) Nyquist plots of B-STO2 and W-STO2 electrodes (fitting of the EIS is shown as hollow circle while the solid lines represent the experimental data). Inset: Randles equivalent circuit for all tested electrodes. Proposed energy band diagram schemes (c) and calculated DOS (d) of B-STO2 and W-STO2 samples. Inset: M–H (M = Ti, Sn).
In addition, the electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) was employed to analyze the lower ohmic resistance and transfer resistance caused by the enhanced conductivity. The frequency range was from 10 kHz to 10 mHz with an amplitude of 5 mV. As shown in Fig. 4b, Nyquist plots of the B-STO2 and W-STO2 electrodes display a semicircle at high-medium frequency and an inclined line at low frequency, corresponding to charge transfer and diffusion, respectively. The components of the Randles equivalent circuit (inset of Fig. 4b) include: Rs, the ohmic resistance (total resistance of the electrolyte, separator, and electrical contacts); Rct, the charge-transfer resistance; W, the Warburg impedance relating to the diffusion of lithium ions into the bulk electrodes; and CPE (constant phase elements) as the double-layer capacitance, respectively. The Rs and Rct of different electrodes determined by fitting of the impedance spectra with the Z-view software were compared (Table S3). The Rct is 90.1 ohm for the B-STO2 electrode, which is much lower than 192.0 ohm for the W-STO2 electrode, suggesting that fast electron and Li+-ion transport resulted from the greatly enhanced conductivity.
A schematic of the structure of B-STO2 is shown in Fig. S6 and the computational details are described in the ESI. As the energy band diagram of B-STO2 in Fig. 4c shows, the M–H (M = Ti, Sn) bonds in the amorphous shell result in intermediate states in the band gap. The calculated density of states (DOS) of the B-STO2 and W-STO2 samples in Fig. 4d display an obvious right shift of the fermi level after hydrogen plasma reduction, gradually forming an n-type conductive structure. This suggests that hydrogenation tends to produce more electrons near the conduction band minimum. Furthermore, from the calculated total and projected DOS, we found that the primary effect of the surface defects comes from the hybrid coupling interactions between the surface M (Ti, Sn) and the H atoms to form M–H chemical bonds. Then, the M–H coupling produces a few localized states in the band gap. Thus, the enhancement of charge carriers that transfer to the surface of the conductive amorphous shell promotes the conductivity of SnxTi1−xO2@SnxTi1−xO2−yHy.
To present the phenomena behind the design of black (Sn, Ti)O2 with a core–shell structure SnxTi1−xO2@SnxTi1−xO2−yHy for enhanced Li-ion battery performance, we will discuss the lithium storage mechanisms. In the initial half cycle, TiO2 is firstly converted into conductive LixTiO2 in the solid solution due to its higher Li-insertion potential (1.6 V versus Li+/Li) in comparison with SnO2, as described by reaction eqn (1) on the basis of an intercalation–deintercalation mechanism:1TiO2 + xLi+ + xe− → LixTiO2 (x ≤ 1)
LixTiO2 has been reported to produce a highway for faster Li+ diffusion.36 The unique core–shell structure (SnxTi1−xO2@SnxTi1−xO2−yHy) obtained by hydrogen plasma possessing a conductive amorphous layer is beneficial for the isotropic electrochemical reaction, as the amorphous layer has been proven to provide a fast pathway for electron transport.24 Then follows the conversion reaction of SnO2 to Sn metal corresponding to eqn (2) where LixTiO2 acts as a buffering matrix to retard the aggregation of metallic Sn. The as-produced Sn nanodots disperse uniformly and are surrounded by an amorphous lithiated titania matrix, which helps to accommodate the huge volume change and accelerate the electrochemical reactions due to a faster charge transfer during the formation of the Li–Sn alloy. Thus, black (Sn, Ti)O2 could maintain the integrity of the structure even after long cycling, resulting in enhanced cycling stability. The electrochemical reaction of Li with SnO2 and Sn is shown in Fig. 5a and is described below in eqn (2) and (3):2SnO2 + 4Li+ + 4e− → 2Li2O + Sn3Sn + xLi+ + xe− → LixSn (0 ≤ x ≤ 4.4)
Schematic of the electrochemical process of the B-STO2 electrode. (a) CV curves of the fifth cycles of the B-SnO2, B-TiO2 and B-STO2 electrodes. (b) XRD patterns of W-SnO2 and B-STO2 after 10 cycles, and the standard XRD pattern of metallic Sn (JCPDS no. 86-2265). (c) TEM images of B-STO2 after 10 cycles, inset: the corresponding HRTEM images. (d) TEM images of W-SnO2 after 10 cycles, inset: corresponding HRTEM images.
To better characterize the structure stability of B-STO2, TEM observation for the B-STO2 electrode after the charge–discharge process was carried out. Impressively, the black B-STO2 electrode could maintain a sub 10 nm scale nanostructure even after long cycling, as shown in Fig. 5c. All the B-STO2 nanoparticles are shown without aggregation or the occurrence of cracks, indicating that the amorphous lithiated titania matrix contributes to accommodate the huge volume change. The weak lattice lines in the HRTEM also suggest that most of the SnO2 nanocrystals transform from polycrystalline to amorphous, in line with the XRD results after cycling (Fig. 5b). No crystalline Sn can be observed, suggesting Sn nanodots disperse uniformly in the amorphous lithiated titania matrix. XPS was also conducted and suggested the existence of the Sn0 of B-STO2 after cycling (Fig. S8). For comparison, obvious peaks belonging to metallic Sn are observed for the XRD pattern of the W-SnO2 electrode after cycling. For W-SnO2, Sn particles nucleated in the Li2O matrix are clearly displayed in Fig. 5d. The wide size distribution of the Sn particles indicates aggregation, which results in low capacity and poor stability. Based on the above features, black B-STO2 is verified as a superior host to facilitate the electrochemical reactions for active Sn nanoclusters, spatially-confined with little aggregation.
The electrochemical performances of the as-prepared B-TiO2, B-STO2, B-SnO2, and W-STO2 anodes were evaluated in half-cells utilizing metallic lithium film as the counter electrode and reference electrode. In Fig. 6a, the first three cyclic voltammograms of the B-STO2 electrode between 0 and 2.5 V are presented. The reduction peak around 0.8 V nearly disappears after the first cycle, indicating that the irreversible loss in the first cycle mainly originates from the irreversible reaction of lithium ions with SnO2 (eqn (2)). The broad reduction peak below 0.5 V is caused by the formation of the Li–Sn alloy (eqn (3)). The oxidation peaks at 0.55 and 0.86 V are ascribed to Sn de-alloying with Li. The broadening wave from 1 V to 2 V is attributed to the insertion/de-insertion of lithium ions in TiO2. It is also noted that the second and third cycles nearly overlap, indicating a superior reversibility of the B-STO2 electrode in lithium ion batteries. This can further be proven by the charge–discharge cycle profiles (Fig. S7) shown in the ESI. The initial discharge capacities gradually increase from 232.7 mA h g−1 for B-TiO2, 920.8 mA h g−1 for B-STO2, to 989.3 mA h g−1 for the B-SnO2 electrodes due to the capacity contributions of SnO2 in the (Sn, Ti)O2 solid solution. The cycle performance of the B-TiO2, B-STO2, B-SnO2, and W-STO2 electrodes under a current density of 0.2 A g−1 in the voltage range of 0–2.5 V vs. Li+/Li were compared. As shown in Fig. 6b, the B-SnO2 electrode shows a fast capacity fading upon long-term cycling. The first discharge and charge capacity of B-STO2 were 920.8 and 754.4 mA h g−1, respectively, corresponding to a coulombic efficiency for the first cycle of 81.9% which suggests a good electrochemical reversibility. As can be seen, the B-STO2 electrode delivers a rather stable capacity as high as 583.4 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles, which is among the best demonstrated of other Sn–Ti–O systems as well as a high rate performance (Table S1). The B-STO2 electrode was assessed stepwise by increasing the charge–discharge current from 0.2 to 5 A g−1, as shown in Fig. 6c. In the B-STO2 electrode, high capacities were obtained: 593.9 mA h g−1 at 0.2 A g−1, 519.8 mA h g−1 at 0.5 A g−1, 475.7 mA h g−1 at 1 A g−1, 429.4 mA h g−1 at 2 A g−1 and 349.6 mA h g−1 at 5 A g−1. Even after being subjected to the high current charge–discharge, the B-STO2 anode was still able to provide a capacity of 555.7 mA h g−1 at 0.2 A g−1. Fig. 6d shows that the cycling performances of the B-STO2 electrode were greatly improved with a specific capacity of 419.2 and 335.3 mA h g−1 at the relatively high charge/discharge rates of 2 A g−1 and 5 A g−1, similar to those required for applications in lithium ion batteries in electrical vehicles and portable electronics.
Electrochemical data for the (Sn, Ti)O2 solid solution: (a) CV curves of the first three cycles of the B-STO2 electrode. (b) Cycle performance of the B-STO2, W-STO2, B-SnO2, B-TiO2 electrodes. (c) Rate performance of the B-STO2 electrode. (d) Cycle performance of B-STO2 at high current density.
Based on the aforementioned features, the conductive amorphous layer is beneficial for the isotropic electrochemical reaction, resulting in the high coulombic efficiency for the first cycle. After lithiation, the obtained structure of the Sn nanodots in an amorphous lithiated titania matrix could efficiently prevent particle aggregation, accommodate the volume change, and provide a stable conductive network for ion kinetics, which contributes to the superior rate performance and cycling stability. Overall, this novel material design of black (Sn, Ti)O2 accounts for higher capacities (583.4 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles) than any reported TiO2 anodes, and both the cycling stability and rate behavior are better than any reported for SnO2 anodes.
