Experimental
Materials
The shrimp shells were obtained from the deep-water shrimp, Pandalus borealis. 2032-type buttons, stainless steel spacers and polyethene separators for button assembly were obtained from MTI Technologies. EMI TFSI and EMI BF4 were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. N-Methyl-2-pyrrolidone, potassium hydroxide and others reagents were purchased from Beijing Chemical Works.
Synthesis of the RGNC-NS
The shrimp shells were rinsed several times with distilled water and dried at 60 °C in a conventional oven, and then milled in a hammer mill into powders. The dried shrimp shells were carbonized at 800 °C for 2 h with a heating rate of 2 °C min−1 in a tubular furnace under an argon flow of 150 mL min−1. Then, the resulting carbonaceous powders were washed in 1 M HCl for 10 h and further rinsed several times with distilled water to pH around 7. The as-prepared carbon powders (RGNC) were re-dispersed in 200 mL NMP with 1 g carbon powders, deaerated with argon, and followed by bath-ultrasonic exfoliation at 40 Hz for 3 h. The macroscopic aggregates were isolated by centrifugation at 1000 rpm, and the black homogeneous supernatant was collected, and filtered through a PVDF filter and then dried at 120 °C to obtain the final samples of the RGNC-NS. The yield of RGNC is around 15 wt% of carbon powders.
Textural characterization and chemical analysis
The microstructures of the samples were observed by using a field emission scanning electron microscope (FESEM, S-3400N, Hitachi), field emission transmission electron microscope (FETEM, JEM2100F, JEOL), and atomic force microscope (AFM, Multimode, Bruker). X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns were examined by using a diffractometer (X-6000, Shimadzu) using Cu Kα radiation (λ = 0.154 nm) at 40 kV with 0.2° 2θ steps. Raman spectra were carried out using a LabRAM HR800 at a laser wavelength of 514 nm. The electrical conductivity of samples was characterized by a standard four-point probe system (Jandel RM3). The N2 (77 K) adsorption–desorption was measured using a Micromeritics ASAP 2010 to obtain the specific surface area based on the multipoints Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) and pore size distributions based on the Non-Local Density Functional Theory (NLDFT) model using a silt model. The surface chemical compositions were measured on an X-ray photoelectron spectroscope (XPS, Escalab 250, Thermo). The contact angles were measured using a dynamic contact angle measuring instrument of DCAT21.
Electrochemical testing
The supercapacitor performances were examined in two-electrode symmetrical cells. The electrodes were prepared by pasting the slurry containing 95 wt% active material (RGNC-NS or RGNC) and 5 wt% PTFE binder without conductive additive onto conducting carbon substrates as current collectors and then drying at 100 °C overnight in a vacuum oven. After that, the electrodes were pressed at 10 MPa with a final loading of around 10 mg cm−2. A porous polypropylene membrane was used as a separator. Aqueous 6 M KOH and the IL mixture of EMI TFSI and EMI BF4 were used as electrolytes, respectively. Cyclic voltammetry (CV) and galvanostatic charge/discharge voltage profiles, and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy were tested on a CHI660D electrochemical workstation.
For the symmetrical cells, the electrode specific capacitance Celectr (F g−1) was calculated from the upper part of discharge curves after voltage drop, according to the formula Celectr = 2I/[m(dV/dt)] where I (A) is the discharge current, m (g) is the mass of the active electrode material of one electrode, and dV/dt (V s−1) is the slope obtained by fitting a straight line to the upper part of the discharge curve in the range of Vmax to 1/2Vmax.63,70 The energy density Ecell (W h kg−1) and the power density Pcell (W kg−1) of the cell were calculated by the formulas Ecell = CcellV2/(2 × 3.6) and Pcell = E/t, respectively, where Ccell is the cell specific capacitance equal to 1/4Celectr, V (V) is the discharge voltage, and t (h) is discharge time.
