Experimental
NMFP-Br was synthesized as previously reported.6 Potassium triflate was recrystallized from ethyl acetate and dried for 3 days at 110 °C. Electrolyte, 0.100 M potassium triflate, was prepared from distilled spectroscopic grade acetonitrile. All materials were stored and analyzed under air- and water-free conditions in a nitrogen environment or under vacuum. Dual-electrode spectroelectrochemistry was performed on thin films of NMFP-Br using the experimental apparatus shown in Fig. 2. The NMFP-Br films were prepared by dropcasting 5.0 μL of a 5.0 mg mL−1 solution in 100 : 1 by volume DMSO/water and were dried under vacuum overnight. Film thickness was measured by stylus and optical profilometry. Films were deposited onto 40 nm thick gold interdigitated electrodes with 20 μm gap spacing on glass microscope slides. The electrodes were fabricated using standard photolithographic patterning and physical vapor deposition of first a 2 nm chromium adhesion layer followed by 40 nm of gold. The interdigitated electrodes provide two separate contacts to the NMFP-Br film, termed working electrode 1 (WE1) and working electrode 2 (WE2). Potential control of WE1 and WE2 versus a reference electrode was carried out using a Solartron 1287 potentiostat; simultaneous conductivity measurements across the WE1–WE2 electrode gap were performed using a Keithley 2400 source-measure unit; and, simultaneous absorbance spectroscopy was performed using an Avantes AvaSpec-USB2 fiber optic spectrometer. Conductivity was calculated using the current across the gap, which was held at a constant offset voltage of 50 mV during cyclic voltammetry. In spectroelectrochemistry experiments, the change in absorbance ΔA = A − Ai was measured where Ai is the absorbance of the film, electrolyte, and apparatus after introduction of electrolyte and just before beginning voltammetry. All electrochemistry was carried out in an air-free nitrogen environment. Scan rates varied from 0.75–3 mV s−1. Some initial cyclic voltammetry only studies were performed using thin films of NMFP-Br on non-interdigitated planar gold electrodes. For these studies, film preparation and physical vapor deposition for electrode fabrication were as described above.
Schematic of dual-electrode spectroelectrochemistry experimental apparatus.
