2.Experimental
La1−yCayNb1−xSbxO4−δ (x = 0.1 or 0.3 and y = 0 or 0.02) samples were synthesized with a two-step solid state reaction. First, stoichiometric amounts of CaCO3 (POCH, Poland, 99.9%), La2O3 (Alfa-Aesar, Germany, 99.9% preheated at 900 °C), Nb2O5 (Alfa Aesar, Germany, 99.9985%) and Sb2O3 (Sigma Aldrich, US, 99%) were weighed and milled in isopropanol for 12 h in a Fritsch Pulverisette 7 planetary ball mill using zirconia balls and cups. The slurry obtained from milling was dried at 100 °C for 2 h, pressed into pellets under a pressure of 180 MPa, and calcined in air at 1200 °C. The samples obtained from the first calcination step were crushed, milled and pressed again under the same conditions followed by sintering in air at 1400 °C for 8 h resulting in ceramic discs with relative density above 90%. No impurities from the zirconia milling medium were detected in the samples after synthesis.
The samples with 10 or 30 mol% Sb are denoted as LNSO10 and LNSO30, respectively. Samples with the same amount of Sb and an addition of calcium as the acceptor dopant are denoted as LCNSO10 and LCNSO30.
Powder X-ray diffraction measurements were performed with a Phillips X'Pert Pro MPD diffractometer with Cu Kα radiation in the 2θ range of 20–90°. The material structure was determined by Rietveld refinement analysis of the XRD patterns using the PANalytical HighScore Plus software. As a starting point for the diffraction analysis, unit cell parameters of the fergusonite (space group no. 15, I2/c)46 and Scheelite (space group no. 88, I41/a)47 crystal structures of LaNbO4 were utilized. Rietveld refinement was performed with the pseudo-Voigt profile function. The structural properties of LNSO10 and 30 were subjected to analysis in a different study and can be found in ref. 29.
Samples for electrical measurements were prepared by painting two identical, circular electrodes using ElectroScience ESL 5542 Pt-paste on each side of the pellets. After painting, the samples were dried at 100 °C and fired in air at 1000 °C for 1 h.
Electrical conductivity values were obtained by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy. A Solartron 1260 FRA analyser was used as an impedance measuring device. Impedance spectra were collected in the frequency range of 1 Hz to 10 MHz and temperature range of 250–900 °C in dry, H2O- and D2O-humidified air. Studies of conductivity as a function of pO2 were performed within the range of ∼10−6 to 0.2 bar at selected temperatures. Both dry and wet gases (2.5% H2O) were used in the pO2-dependency study. Different oxygen partial pressures were obtained from appropriate N2–O2 gas mixtures. Humid atmospheres were obtained by bubbling the gas through liquid H2O or D2O, and the dry gas was fed directly from the gas cylinder.
For the measurements of conductivity as a function of water vapour partial pressure, a gas mixer equipped with wetting and drying stages was used. The wetting stage consists of a series of two bubblers, the first containing deionized H2O and the second saturated aqueous KBr solution. The drying stage is a porous filter filled with P2O5, which serves as a drying agent. During the measurement gas is flowing in parallel through both stages and is mixed at the end. The gas flows through the wetting and drying stages are controlled by using flowmeters to obtain the desired water vapour pressure.
The impedance data were deconvoluted by means of the brick layer model using the Equivalent Circuit for Windows software.48 As described in detail by Haile et al.,49 model circuits consisting of a series of a resistor, R, and a constant phase element, Q, connected in parallel, (RQ), were fitted to the semicircles (arcs) present in the impedance plots. The highest frequency semicircle is typically attributed to the grain interior (bulk), whereas the next highest frequency semicircle is attributed to grain boundary conductivity. In this way, the grain interior and grain boundary conductivity values were determined. Electrode responses were present but are not relevant for the current investigation.
The constant phase element Q is dependent on the impedance according to the formula 1/Z = Y = Q0(jω)n, where the admittance Q0 and the angle of misalignment, n, are the fitted parameters. From these parameters and the measured resistance, capacitances can be calculated for each semicircle by using the formula:1
Knowing the capacitance and resistance of each semicircle, one may calculate conductivity values according to the following:234where σgi, σgb,spec, σtot are the grain interior, specific grain boundary and total conductivity, respectively; g is a geometrical factor including the sample thickness, electrode area and correction for porosity; Rgi and Rgb are the respective grain interior and grain boundary resistance, whereas Cgi an Cgb are the grain interior and grain boundary capacitance.
If the temperature dependence of the conductivity is known, the activation energy for the conductivity can be calculated by fitting the experimental values to the equation:5where σ is a conductivity of any type (total, partial, bulk, grain boundary), T is the absolute temperature, A is the pre-exponential factor, Ea is the activation energy and k is the Boltzmann constant.
For the LNSO30 samples, 18O tracer isotopic exchange was conducted to determine the oxygen contribution to the total conduction. The sintered samples were first ground with SiC paper and then polished with successive grades of diamond spray to 1/4 μm finish. Prior to the exchange, the samples were first annealed in 210 mbar high purity oxygen (99.6% BOC) with normal isotopic abundance for a period that was at least ten times the planned exchange time, to establish the chemical equilibrium between the sample and the gas phase. Samples were exchanged at 800 and 900 °C and the effective exchange times were 1056 s and 823 s, respectively.
The 18O penetration profile as a function of depth was measured with a secondary ion mass spectrometer (SIMS, IONTOF TOF.SIMS5). A 2 keV Cs+ ion source with a nominal current of 96 nA was used as the sputtering gun, to enhance the counting statistics of the O2− signal. The sputtering beam current was measured both before and after the sputtering process and showed good consistency, indicating a constant sputtering rate. The crater size was set to 300 × 300 μm2 and a smaller area (150 × 150 μm2) at the centre of the crater was analysed with the Bi+ primary beam. The diffusion profile was fitted using a Matlab script50 to extract the tracer diffusivity parameters. To obtain the depth information of the diffusion profile, the sputtering rate was calibrated by measuring the depth of the crater using a Zygo NewView 200 interferometer.
