Experimental section
Materials
N,N′-Dimethylacetamide (DMAc) was obtained from Alfa Aesar and dried by vacuum distillation at 130 °C over CaH2. Decafluorobiphenyl (DFBP), 4,4′-(hexafluoroisopropylidene)diphenol (HFBPA), 6-bromohexanoyl chloride, AlCl3, 1,2-dichloroethane, triethylsilane, and trifluoroacetic acid were also obtained from Alfa Aesar and used as-received. 4,4′-(9-Fluorenylidene)diphenol (BPFL) was obtained from TCI Co. Ltd and used as-received. Potassium carbonate (K2CO3) and dichloromethane (DCM) were purchased from BDH chemicals and used as-received.
Synthesis of hydrophobic and hydrophilic oligomers
The synthetic procedure for the hydrophobic oligomer with x = 3.1 repeat units is as follows: DFBP (1.67 g, 5 mmol) and HFBPA (1.68 g, 5 mmol) were dissolved in 20 mL DMAc in a 100 mL three-neck round bottom flask with a condenser under N2 atmosphere at room temperature. K2CO3 (1.66 g, 12 mmol) was added to the solution and then the mixture was heated to 80 °C for 1 h. HFBPA (0.5 g) was added to the mixture and allowed to react at 40 °C for 4 h to ensure that all the oligomers were hydroxyl-terminated. The viscous solution was poured into deionized water to precipitate the product. The white solid was isolated by filtration, washed three times with deionized water and dried overnight at 80 °C in a vacuum oven. Hydrophobic oligomers with a different number of repeat units were synthesized by controlling the reaction time.
Fluoro-terminated hydrophilic oligomer with y = 3.6 repeat units was synthesized via a similar procedure. BPFL (1.75 g, 5 mmol) and DFBP (1.67 g, 5 mmol) were dissolved in 20 mL DMAc under N2 atmosphere. K2CO3 (1.66 g, 12 mmol) was added to the solution and the mixture was reacted at 80 °C for 1 h. DFBP (0.6 g) was added to the mixture and reacted at 40 °C for 4 h. After precipitation, filtration and drying, a white solid was yielded. Similarly, hydrophilic oligomers with different amount of repeat units were obtained by varying reaction time.
Synthesis of multiblock copoly(arylene ether)s (mPEs)
The hydrophobic oligomer (1.15 g, 0.5 mmol, x = 3.1) and hydrophilic oligomer (1.33 g, 0.5 mmol, y = 3.6) were dissolved in 20 mL DMAc at room temperature under N2. K2CO3 (0.15 g, 1.1 mmol) was added to the solution and the mixture was reacted at 80 °C for 4 h. The viscous solution was poured into deionized water and white solid was precipitated out. The product was filtered, washed with deionized water and dried overnight at 80 °C in a vacuum oven.
Synthesis of BrKC6-mPEs
The synthesis method of BrKC6-mPEs was modified from literature.24 Multiblock copolymer mPE-X3.1Y3.6 (1.00 g, 0.74 mmol hydrophilic repeat units) was dissolved in 20 mL DCM in a flask under nitrogen atmosphere. The flask was chilled in an ice bath. 6-Bromohexanoyl chloride (0.45 mL, 2.96 mmol) and AlCl3 (0.40 g, 2.96 mmol) were added to the solution and warmed to room temperature. The mixture was reacted for 5 h at room temperature. The solution was poured into 200 mL deionized water and heated to 60 °C to evaporate the solvent. The product was dissolved in DCM and precipitated in deionized water three times to obtain a purified light yellow solid.
Synthesis of BrC6-mPEs
BrKC6-mPE-X3.1Y3.6 (1.14 g, 0.74 mmol hydrophilic repeat units) was dissolved in 20 mL 1,2-dichloroethane in a three-neck round bottom flask with a condenser at room temperature under nitrogen. Trifluoroacetic acid (3.1 mL, 40.7 mmol) and triethylsilane (0.59 mL, 3.7 mmol) were added to the solution. The solution was heated to reflux for 24 h. Then it was cooled to room temperature and poured into a NaOH solution (1.63 g NaOH, 200 mL deionized water). The mixture was heated to 80 °C to evaporate the solvent. The product was isolated by filtration. The product was dissolved in DCE and precipitated in deionized water three times producing a white solid product.
Membrane casting, quaternization and ion exchange
BrC6-mPEs (0.20 g) was dissolved in 5 mL 1,2-dichloroethane and the resulting solution was filtered through a 0.45 μm poly(tetrafluoroethylene) (PTFE) membrane syringe filter into a 4 cm diameter aluminum dish. The solvent was evaporated in a tube furnace at 40 °C under nitrogen for 18 h. The free-standing membrane was about 40 μm thick.
The membrane was quaternized as follows: immersion in 45 wt% trimethylamine aqueous solution at room temperature for 48 h. After being removed from the solution, the quaternized membrane with a bromide counter ion was washed with deionized water three times. The membrane was soaked in 1 M KOH solution under nitrogen for 24 h to exchange the bromide ions for hydroxide ions. After being washed with deionized water three times, the membrane was stored in deionized water.
Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectra and gel permeation chromatography (GPC)
The chemical structure of the oligomers and polymers were analyzed by a variety of NMR techniques, including one-dimensional 1H NMR and 19F NMR obtained with a Varian Mercury Vx 400 MHz spectrometer, two-dimensional heteronuclear single quantum coherence (HSQC) and one-dimensional nuclear Overhauser effect (NOE) obtained with a Bruker 500 MHz spectrometer. HSQC and NOE NMR spectra were used to identify the position of the tether attachment on the polymer backbone. Chloroform-d was used as the solvent for non-ionic samples and N,N-dimethylformamide-d7 was used for polar samples. Quantitative 19F NMR spectra were collected at 376.273 MHz with a 12.5 s relaxation delay. The HSQC analysis employed 8 scans, 256 increments along t1, 1024 data points along t2, and 145 Hz as one-bond coupling constant. The one-dimensional NOE spectra used the DPFGSE-NOE pulse program, a mixing time of 0.2 s, a relaxation delay of 2 s, and an acquisition time of 3.28 s.
The molecular weight of the polymers was determined by gel permeation chromatography (GPC) (Shimadzu) equipped with an LC-20 AD HPLC pump and a refractive index detector (RID-10 A, 120 V). Tetrahydrofuran (THF) was used as the eluent with a flow rate of 1.0 mL min−1 at 35 °C. The molecular weight was measured by a calibration curve based on polystyrene standards.
Ionic conductivity
The ionic resistance of the membranes was measured with a four-probe, in-plane electrochemical impedance spectrometer over the frequency range from 1 Hz to 1 MHz with a PAR 2273 potentiostat. All samples were tested in HPLC-grade water under nitrogen to minimize the effect of CO2. The samples were equilibrated for 30 min prior to measurement. The in-plane ionic conductivity was calculated using eqn (1).1
In eqn (1), σ is the ionic conductivity in S cm−1, L is the length between sensing electrodes in cm, W and T are the width and thickness of the membrane in cm, respectively, and R is the resistance measured in ohms.
Ion exchange capacity (IEC), water uptake (WU), hydration number (λ), number of freezable water (Nfree) and bound, non-freezable water (Nbound) molecules
The ion exchange capacity was calculated using NMR data which is discussed in detail in the next section. The water uptake of the membranes was calculated by eqn (2).2
In eqn (2), Md is the dry mass of the membranes measured after being dried in vacuum for 24 h and Mw is the wet mass of the membranes without surface water. Both dry and wet membranes were in the OH− form and measured at room temperature. The number of water molecules per ionic group, hydration number λ, was calculated using eqn (3).3
The number of freezable water (Nfree) and bound water (or non-freezable water) (Nbound) were determined by differential scanning calorimetry (DSC). DSC measurements were carried out on a DSC Q200 (TA Instruments). The membrane samples were fully-hydrated by soaking in deionized water at least for one week. After the water on the membrane surface was wiped off, a 3 to 5 mg sample was quickly sealed in an aluminum pan. The sample was cooled to −50 °C and heated at a rate of 5 °C min−1 under N2 (20 mL min−1). The quantity of freezable and non-freezable water was determined by eqn (4)–(6).32–344Mfree is the mass of freezable water and Mtot is the total mass of water absorbed in the membrane. The weight fraction of freezable water was calculated by eqn (5).5Hf is enthalpy obtained by the integration of the DSC freezing peak and Hice is enthalpy of fusion for water, corrected for the subzero freezing point according to eqn (6).6Hice = Hoice − ΔCpΔTfΔCp is the difference between the specific heat capacity of liquid water and ice. ΔTf is the freezing point depression.
Morphological characterization
The surface morphology of the membranes was analyzed by tapping mode atomic force microscopy (AFM) with an Asylum Research instrument. The probe (AC240TM-R3, Olympus) with a cantilever spring constant of 1.5 N m−1 was used to take images of the samples at ambient temperature and 50% relative humidity. The Amp InvOLS was 109 nm V−1. The scanning frequency was 1 Hz. The measurements were conducted under the same conditions for each sample to keep consistency.
Thermal stability and mechanical properties
Thermal stability of the hydroxide form of the membranes was analyzed by thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) on a TA Instruments Q50 analyzer. The thermal degradation was evaluated at a heating rate of 5 °C min−1 up to 800 °C in nitrogen.
The stress–strain relationship was investigated by dynamic mechanical analysis (DMA) using TA Instruments Q800 with controlled force mode. Rectangular membrane samples were fully hydrated and tested using tension clamps after removing surface water at 100% relative humidity. The experimental parameters were set as: preload force 0.05 N, isothermal at 30 °C, soak time 1 min, force ramp rate 0.5 N min−1 and upper force limit up to 18 N.19
Alkaline stability
The alkaline stability of the membranes was evaluated by soaking the OH− form membranes into 1 M NaOH in a Teflon lined Parr reactor at 60 °C for up to 1000 h to measure the changes in ionic conductivity. Before measurement, each membrane was thoroughly washed with deionized water. The ionic conductivity was determined in HPLC-grade water at room temperature.
Oxygen solubility, diffusivity and permeability
The oxygen transport properties, including solubility, diffusivity and permeability, were measured using an intelligent gravimetric analyzer by Hiden Analytical Ltd. (IGA-1). A membrane sample was placed in the chamber which was then evacuated for 24 h. Oxygen gas was introduced into the chamber in step increments of 250 mbar from vacuum to 1 bar. At each step, the mass was recorded until equilibrium was reached at each pressure to give the amount of oxygen absorbed by the sample at a given pressure. The oxygen solubility S (mass% per bar) of the membrane was calculated by the weight percent increase from vacuum to 1 bar oxygen pressure. The mass vs. time data for the step from vacuum to 250 mbar was used to estimate the oxygen diffusion coefficient, or diffusivity D (cm2 s−1), in the membrane according to eqn (7).7Mt is the mass of the membrane and absorbed oxygen at time t, M∞ is the mass at equilibrium and l is half of the thickness of the membrane in cm. The oxygen permeability, P, in mol (bar cm s)−1 was calculated by eqn (8).8ρ is the density of the membrane (g cm−3), which was measured by pycnometer to be 1.1 g cm−3, and Moxygen is the molecular weight of oxygen.
