3Results and discussion
3.1Morphology and structure of poly([NH122][STFSI])
Fig. 1 shows a free-standing polymer membrane which was prepared by a solvent casting method. The film is yellowish and translucent suggesting that the material is in an amorphous state.
Image of the synthesized poly([NH122][STFSI]) polymer membrane.
The molecular structure and dynamics of the polymeric PIL electrolyte was characterized using both liquid and solid-state 13C NMR (Fig. 2). The polymer structure and the assignment of the resonance lines are shown in the inset at the top left of the figure. For the solution NMR spectrum, it is very interesting that all the carbon sites from the polymer chain (C1–C7) show significantly lower NMR intensity compared to the carbon sites of the cation (C8, C9 and C10). This is caused by their long T1 relaxation time, and therefore the 13C NMR signal was saturated and suppressed due to the short recycle delay (2 s) during the acquisition. This long T1 relaxation suggests that the mobility of the polymer main chain is in the ‘slow’ motion region where the frequency is lower than the Larmor frequency according to the Bloembergen–Purcell–Pound theory (BPP theory).22 This low mobility of the polymer chain is in contrast with the ammonium cations which show much quicker motions, as suggested by the relatively short T1 (therefore higher intensity) as well as long T2 (indicated by the narrow line).
Solution and solid-state CP-MAS 13C NMR spectra of poly([NH122][STFSI]). All the 13C NMR resonance peaks are assigned to the corresponding carbon sites, as labelled numerically on both the spectra and the molecule.
In the solid-state CP-MAS experiment, the 13C NMR magnetization is polarized by the 1H, and thus the 13C resonance intensity is affected by both the 1H T1s which are typically much shorter than the  and the CP efficiency. The resonance lines of C1 and C2 are not visible in the CP-MAS spectrum due to their short T2. Their peaks are broad and embedded in the baseline of C8 and C9, which suggests that the mobility of the polymer backbone (C1 and C2) is largely restricted compared to the STFSI side-chains and the ammonium cations in its solid state. In summary: solution and solid-state NMR data show that the polymer anions and the ammonium cations exhibit very different (decoupled) mobilities in both solution and solid states.
3.2Thermal properties and conductivity
The thermal properties of the polymeric PIL were investigated by differential scanning calorimetry (DSC), and the result is shown in Fig. 3. On heating from −50 °C up to 200 °C, this material goes through two glass transitions (Tg) with inflection points of 62 °C and 108 °C, respectively. It is speculated that these transitions are related to the molecular relaxation of the [NH122]+ cations and the poly[STFSI]− polymer main chain. This argument is strongly supported by the 13C NMR data (Section 3.1) which show that the ammonium cation mobility is decoupled from the polymer chain mobility.
DSC thermogram of the polymeric PIL poly([NH122][STFSI]).
Fig. 4 shows the Arrhenius plot of the conductivity of the poly([NH122][STFSI]) sample over a temperature range from 30 °C to 150 °C. The conductivity of this material is surprisingly high, reaching 3.1 × 10−4 S cm−1 at 120 °C. As a benchmark, Nafion membranes show a room-temperature conductivity of 10−2 to 10−1 S cm−1 when fully hydrated,23 but at a humidity of 5% or lower their conductivities drop to 10−9 to 10−5 S cm−1,24,25 depending on the humidity. In fact, despite many synthetic efforts dedicated to improving the conductivity of solid-state polyelectrolytes,3–5,7,26,27 relatively few polymeric materials show considerable conductivities in their pure solid state. As an example, Meyer et al.27 have shown that tethering imidazole directly to a polymer backbone gave disappointing results: poly(4-vinylimidazole) (P4VI) as well as several copolymers with 2-acrylamido-2-methylpropanesulfonic acid (P4VI-co-AMPS) were prepared. The conductivities of P4VI (2 × 10−11 S cm−1 at 120 °C) and P4VI-co-AMPS (1 × 10−10 S cm−1 at 120 °C, imidazole/–SO3H = 5 : 1) were very low, which was attributed to the rigid nature of these materials (Tg = 210 °C for P4VI2.5-co-AMPS).
Temperature dependent conductivity data acquired for the poly([NH122][STFSI]) sample. The top x-axis indicates the temperature normalized by the DSC glass transition temperature Tg = 62 °C.
The development of highly conductive all-solid polymeric electrolytes clearly requires rational design and careful tuning of the polymer structure.28,29 Recently, Chen et al. reported a comb polymer with amphoteric groups which can self-assemble into organized supramolecular nanochannels.25 The proton conductivity was boosted by two orders of magnitude upon forming the organized nanochannels, reaching 3 × 10−4 S cm−1 at 120 °C in its pure solid state. The polymeric PIL developed in this study exhibits comparable conductivity to this organized supramolecular assembly, and to the best of our knowledge, this conductivity is amongst the highest anhydrous conductivities for an all-solid polymeric proton-conductors reported so far.
The x-axis on the top of Fig. 4 indicates that the temperature normalized by a DSC Tg of 62 °C. It is interesting to notice that the polymer shows a significant conductivity of about 6 × 10−6 S cm−1 as the temperature approaches a glass transition temperature of Tg = 62 °C. This value is several orders of magnitude higher than the poly(ethylene glycol) based ammonium, phosphonium and imidazolium samples, which typically show conductivities in the range of 10−12 S cm−1 or lower at T = Tg.30,31 This high ionic conductivity at Tg therefore strongly suggests that the cation mobility is decoupled from the segmental motion of the polymeric anion.
To probe this decoupling further, the temperature dependent ionic conductivity data for poly([NH122][STFSI]) were fitted to the Vogel–Tamman–Fulcher (VTF) equation:2where σ0 is the pre-exponential constant that is proportional to the charge carrier concentration (the intercept of the fit on the y-axis), B is the pseudoactivation energy and T0 corresponds to the ideal glass transition temperature, which can be thought of as the temperature at which the ionic conduction is completely frozen.
Fig. S1 shows the data in the form of ln σ vs. 1000/(T − T0), indicating an excellent fit over the whole temperature region of the data. From the VTF parameters listed in Table 1, we can see that the value of T0 (225 K), which corresponds to the temperature where ionic conductivity ceases completely, is well below the Tg (62 °C or 335 K) for this polymer system. This observation is consistent with the conductivity analysis, where the poly([NH122][STFSI]) exhibited some ionic conduction at temperatures below Tg (60 °C). The difference between Tg and T0 for poly([NH122][STFSI]) was almost 110 °C.
VTF parameters for ionic conductivity measurements of poly([NH122][STFSI]) obtained from Arrhenius plot
Samplelog σ0 (S cm−1)BT0 (K)Poly([NH122][STFSI])0.23 ± 0.05−524 ± 12225 ± 2Previously, in a salt in the polymer P(EO/PO)/LiTFSI electrolyte system, a close correspondence between Tg and T0 was observed, which was ascribed to the coupling of ionic motion to the segmental motion of the polymer backbone.32 The same study described another electrolyte system PMMA/EMITFSI, where the difference between Tg and T0 was found to increase, reaching up to 100 °C with increase in salt concentration. It was suggested that the large difference between Tg and T0 indicates the decoupling of ionic motion from the structural relaxation.
Hence, a large difference between Tg and T0 for poly([NH122][STFSI]) indicates that there are some ionic motions in this polymer system even in the glassy state. In other words, the ionic motions in [NH122]+ are decoupled from the structural relaxation of the polymer backbone. Since, the mobile cation [NH122]+ is a proton carrier in this polymer system, this observation indicates that the poly([NH122][STFSI]) is a proton-conducting polymer.
In order to provide further insight into the mechanism of ionic transport in poly([NH122][STFSI]), the ionic conductivity at glass transition, denoted as σ(Tg), was analysed in terms of the decoupling index (Rτ), which is a measure of the ratio of the conductivity relaxation time (τσ) to structural relaxation time τs, using the following relationship:333log Rτ = 14.3 + log σ(Tg)
The experimentally determined value of σ(Tg) for poly([NH122][STFSI]) was 2.4 × 10−6 S cm−1, hence from eqn (3), the log Rτ value is ∼8.7. In general, a higher value of Rτ indicates that the ionic motions are weakly controlled by the immobile components of the polymer system.
3.3NMR spectroscopy and macromolecular dynamics in the solid state
Solid-state NMR provides a versatile tool for probing the material structure and dynamics at the molecular level.16 The 1H NMR spectra of a stationary powder sample of organic solids are usually broad and featureless due to the strong homonuclear dipole–dipole interactions. Since these interactions can be partially or completely averaged out by dynamics, the line width of these spectra retains resourceful information about the molecular motions.8,11,18,34–36 However, the information of molecular mobility is at the cost of the spectral resolution. This paradox can be resolved by introducing a second high-resolution 13C dimension to the spectra, i.e. 2D WISE spectra.16 In a 2D WISE experiment, the 13C dimension provides molecular level site-specific resolution on the structure, while the line width in the 1H dimension provides information on the mobility of the corresponding group.18,37
Fig. 5a and c show the WISE spectra of the poly([NH122][STFSI]) measured at room temperature (20 °C) and 85 °C, respectively. The two temperature points were chosen such that one temperature (RT) is below both glass transitions and the other (85 °C) is between the two glass transitions according to the DSC result (Fig. 3). Fig. 5b and d are the 1H spectra slices taken from the 2D WISE spectra of 5a and c, respectively. The corresponding 13C chemical shifts and the peak assignments are labelled on the top of each spectrum. At room temperature, all the groups from the cations and polymeric anions show quite broad proton lines, which is due to the fact that both the polymer chains and the cations are in their glassy state at room temperature and therefore exhibit low mobility. C1 and C8 are of the same 13C chemical shifts at 39.5 ppm and therefore show an overlapped proton line. The 1H line can be deconvoluted into two components with the line widths of 7.1 kHz and 18.6 kHz, respectively. Apparently, the narrow line can be assigned to C8 which has the identical line width to C10 (7.1 kHz), and the broad line is assigned to C1 which has similar line width to C4 &amp; C5 (20.5 kHz). Although both the cations and the polymeric anions are in their glassy state at room temperature, they show remarkably different dynamics as evidenced by the different proton line widths.
WISE spectra of the poly([NH122][STFSI]) measured at room temperature (RT) (a) and 85 °C (c). The peaks indicated by the asterisks are the spinning sidebands of the aromatic group. (b) and (d) are the 1D 1H NMR line slices taken from the 2D spectra of (a) and (c) respectively. The blue lines in (b) and (d) are the experimental spectra, the green lines are the deconvoluted narrow and broad components using the mixed Lorentzian and Gaussian function, and the red lines are the sum of the individual components.
At 85 °C, the proton line widths of C10 and C8 reduced drastically to 1.9 kHz and 1.4 kHz, respectively, whereas the line widths of C1 and C4 &amp; C5 remain at similar values, i.e., 21.0 kHz and 23.4 kHz, respectively. Note that the oscillation at the foot of the C10 and C8 1H lines is caused by the long 1H coherences which were truncated in the indirect dimension acquisition. Therefore, the true line widths of C10 and C8 should be even narrower than the values shown above. The comparison between the line widths measured at the two different temperatures reveals that upon increasing the temperature to 85 °C, the material goes through the first glass transition process (as shown by the DSC data) where the [NH122]+ cations become mobile, whereas the dynamics of the polymer anions remains essentially the same. Therefore, the NMR observations clearly indicate decoupled molecular dynamics between the cations and the polymeric anions, which are highly desirable for practical applications as this feature allows the immobilization of the anions without sacrificing the cation (or proton) mobility.
3.4Restricted proton diffusion in the solid state
The high cation mobility at elevated temperatures allows us to measure the ‘dry’ 1H diffusion coefficients in the solid state using pulse field gradient (PFG) NMR. Fig. 6 shows the time-dependent diffusion coefficient curves of the mobile cations. It is worth mentioning that only a single diffusion coefficient can be obtained for the whole [NH122]+ cation from the fitting of the NMR signal attenuation curve (with increasing gradient strength). This means that 1H is strongly associated with the cations and thus shows the same diffusion coefficient, suggesting a vehicular type diffusion mechanism in the system. For all the three temperatures studied, the diffusion coefficient of the cation drops rapidly in the initial stage, and then reaches a plateau with increasing diffusion time. This is a typical behaviour for restricted diffusion in systems with inter-connected pores or channels.40 For unrestricted diffusion, the diffusion coefficient measured by NMR DNMR is equal to the molecular self-diffusion coefficient, which is independent of the diffusion time. In a restricted space, wall collisions cause the diffusion coefficient to reduce, and for times t ≫ d2/(6D0t) (where d is the characteristic length of the space, and D0 is the self-diffusion coefficient), DNMR becomes zero in the case of isolated pores. For interconnected pores or channels, however, DNMR reaches an asymptotic value DeffNMR(∞), reduced from the free diffusion coefficient by tortuosity effects, but nonetheless finite. Therefore, the diffusion behaviour shown in Fig. 6 apparently suggested that the cations diffuse within inter-connected pores or channels. Again this result is consistent with the conductivity measurements showing a high conductivity at elevated temperatures which suggests a continuous cation transport pathway.
Time-dependant diffusion coefficients of the poly([NH122][STFSI]) sample measured by PFG-NMR at different temperatures. The solid lines represent the best fit to the experimental data (dots) using eqn (4).38,39
The time-dependent diffusion coefficient in confining geometries can be used to probe the surface-to-volume ratio and thus the size of the pores or channels by assuming a proper geometry of the space.39 It has been shown by Latour et al.39 that for restricted diffusion within interconnected channels, the apparent diffusion coefficient DNMR(t) is given by:4and5where c may be best interpreted such that (1 − c) is the proportion of molecules experiencing the restriction on the wall surfaces. S and V are the surface area and the volume of the confining space, respectively. DNMR is the apparent diffusion coefficient measured by PFG-NMR, D0 is the self-diffusion coefficient of the molecules within a free space, t is the diffusion time, θ is a fitting parameter with dimensions of time, and α is the tortuosity of the material which is defined by the relation:416
The time-dependent diffusion experimental data are fitted with eqn (4) in Fig. 6. It is worth mentioning that due to the slow diffusion and short T2 relaxation, the shortest possible diffusion time for the PFG-NMR measurement was 8 ms. The ‘free diffusion region’ (with very short diffusion time) was not included in the present fitting, and thus a precise fitting was not possible. The best fit to the experimental data allowed a rough estimation of the surface-to-volume ratio to be S/V ≈ 1.5 × 108 m−1 for all the three temperatures. Assuming an interconnected channel geometry (S/V = 4/d), the diameter of the channels can be estimated to be about 27 nm. More precise characterization of the size of the channels has been performed using the spin diffusion method and will be further discussed in the following section. Nevertheless, the restricted diffusion behaviour at longer diffusion times clearly suggested an interconnected channel structure. A schematic illustration of this proposed structure is shown in Fig. 7. The polymeric anions show relatively low mobility and form rigid domains, whereas the highly dissociable and mobile protic cations form nanoscale channels in which their diffusion is restricted by the rigid polymer walls but they can diffuse freely along the channel. This nanoscale structure of interconnecting mobile channels greatly facilitates the proton transport in the polymer solid.
Schematic illustration of the proposed micro-structure of the polymeric PIL material.
3.5The diameter of the mobile cation channel
Fitting of the restricted diffusion data gives only a rough estimation on the diameter of the mobile channels due to the limited data available at short diffusion times. Solid-state NMR dipolar filtered 1H spin diffusion experiments16,42 were performed in order to more accurately measure the size of the mobile region. This technique monitors the equilibration of the initial polarization of the mobile domain I(tm) selected by the dipolar filter during a mixing time tm. Fig. 8 shows the plot of the normalized intensity I(tm)/I(0) versus at 85 °C, where I(0) is the initial NMR intensity of the mobile domain. Note that the spin diffusion process has reached equilibrium (plateau) within approximately 50 ms (). This value is an order of magnitude smaller than the T1 relaxation time, which is about 800 ms as estimated from the saturation-recovery experiment. Hence the effect of T1 relaxation on the NMR signal attenuation is negligible and therefore not considered in the calculation.
The static dipolar filtered spin diffusion curve of the poly([NH122][STFSI]) sample. All the NMR intensities I(tm) were normalized by the initial value I(0) (spin diffusion time of 2 μs).
The equilibrium magnetization as indicated by the dotted dash line in Fig. 8 is 0.70. This value is in good agreement with the theoretical stoichiometric ratio of the protons in the mobile cation [NH122]+ over the whole [NH122][STFSI] repeat unit which is 0.67. This means that the dipolar filter works very well for the present system and it selectively picks up the signal from mobile cations, whereas leaves the rigid signal from the relatively rigid polymeric anions unaffected.
The characteristic length of the mobile region can be determined using the following equation:16,177where  is obtained by extrapolating the initial linear region of the spin diffusion curve to the x-axis (I = 0). For the present sample,  is 13 ± 1 ms1/2 (see Fig. 8) at 85 °C. ε is the number of orthogonal dimensions relevant for the effective spin diffusion process: 1 for lamellar, 2 for cylindrical and 3 for spherical structures. Deff is the arithmetic average of the inverses square root of the 1H spin diffusion coefficients in the mobile (Dm) and rigid (Dr) regions:8
Various methods have been developed to estimate Dm and Dr.37,42–45Dm can be estimated via the full width at half maximum (FWHM) Δvm1/2 of the static 1H spectrum:379where 〈r2〉 is the mean-square distance between the nearest spins. Due to the rapid decrease of dipole–dipole interaction with the third power of the inverse proton–proton distance, only the nearest neighbours within distances smaller than 0.3 nm are taken into account. The estimated weight mean square of the distances is approximately 0.08 nm2. α is a cut-off parameter for the Lorentzian line shape. This parameter is defined such that the absorption spectrum intensity is zero for the frequency range |Δω| &gt; α. Δvm1/2 is the line width of the mobile component. The diffusion coefficient of the rigid component Dr can be calculated by:10where Δvr1/2 denotes the rigid proton line width. The dimensionality factor ε = 2 for a tubular geometry.
Table 2 lists all the parameters for the calculation of the diameter of the mobile cation channel. The characteristic diameter of the mobile channel, as calculated from the spin diffusion experiments using eqn (7), is d = 10.4 ± 3.0 nm. This value is within the same order of magnitude compared to that calculated from the PFG-diffusion NMR experiment, but is much more reliable. As a comparison, the length of the [STFSI]− side chain (from the tip of CF3 group to the CH group in the polymer chain) is ∼1.1 nm, and the length of the [NH122]+ is ∼0.5 nm, as estimated from the DFT calculation. Thus the diameter of the mobile channel is roughly 20 times larger than that of the cations, and therefore would allow the cations to diffuse freely within a diffusion time of 0.1 ms (assuming free self-diffusion coefficient of 10−9 m2 s−1 at 85 °C as estimated from the fitting in Fig. 6) and to show a restricted diffusion (by the walls of the channels) behaviour at a longer diffusion time scale.
Parameters used to calculate the diameter of the mobile cation channel
Δvm1/2, kHzα, kHzΔvr1/2, kHz〈r2〉, nm21.30 ± 0.0225 ± 0.125.0 ± 0.50.080.28 ± 0.010.45 ± 0.070.35 ± 0.0713 ± 1Ikkala and co-workers46 have indicated that the anisotropic nano-structures yields orientation-dependent conductivity, and McGrath et al.47 have also shown that continuity of nanoscale domains is crucial for rapid proton transport in sulfonated polymers. In the present polymeric PIL system, the powder form of the material excludes the possibility of macroscopically ordered structures, thus the effects of orientation on the conductivity cannot be observed. However, the nanoscale structure of interconnected mobile channels clearly enhances the anhydrous proton conductivity, as indicated by its superior conductivity to many other anhydrous polymeric systems with similar chemical structures.3–5,7,26
Although the exact mechanism of the enhancement is currently not yet fully understood, we speculate that the decoupled dynamics between the cations and polymeric anions plays an important role in facilitating the proton transport. It is generally accepted that the rate of proton transport in an anhydrous polymer system is largely affected by the glass-transition temperature (Tg) of the polymer chain.27 Proton mobility can be based either on a distinct liquid phase (water, H3PO4, imidazole melt, etc.) or on flexible polymer segments bearing acidic or basic groups. As yet, significant proton conductivities have not been established in a rigid polymer system of such geometry in which proton transport through nano-scale channels. As a high proton mobility (as indicated by the PFG-NMR results) has been achieved at the temperatures below the Tg of the polymer chain, the high mechanical strength of this polymer at such temperatures will make this material well-suited for application in PEMs.
