Experimental section
Synthesis of the materials
PAF-1 was synthesised according to the procedure published previously25 to give an off-white powder with a BET surface area of ∼3800 m2 g−1 and a microporous pore size distribution centred at 12.6 Å. Single step carbonization of PAF-1 was performed for 3 h in 120 ml min−1 of N2 flow with a heating rate of 2 °C min−1 at temperatures ranging from 500 °C to 900 °C; denoted as PAF-500 to PAF-900, respectively. After natural cooling, samples were characterized and used without any further treatment. PAF-900 successfully formed a high surface area, highly conductive microporous onion like carbon, so is referred to as MOLC in discussion of its electrochemical characterization.
Structural characterizations
Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) was performed to evaluate the degree of carbonization of PAF-1 at different temperatures. FTIR spectra were recorded using an attenuated total reflectance Fourier transform infrared (ATR-FTIR) (PerkinElmer, USA) in the range of 500–4000 cm−1 at an average of 32 scans with a resolution of 4 cm−1. Powder X-ray diffraction (PXRD) patterns of the carbonized samples were obtained using a Phillips 1140 diffractometer with Cu Kα line generated at 40 kV and 25 mA at a scan rate of 1° min−1, and a step size of 0.02°. The structure of the product was further discerned by Raman spectroscopy using a Renishaw Confocal micro-Raman Spectrometer equipped with a HeNe (632.8 nm) laser operating at 10% power. Extended scans (10 s) were performed between 100 and 3200 wave numbers with a laser spot size of 1 μm. Microstructural analysis on MOLC particles was performed using transmission electron microscopy (TEM, FEI Tecnai F20) at the accelerating voltage of 200 kV and scanning electron microscopy (SEM, FEI Nova NanoSEM 450 FEG). Thermogravimetry (TGA) was conducted using a Netzsch STA 449 F1 Jupiter Simultaneous TGA/DSC Thermal Analyser system following a correction/blank run (empty crucibles), under the following conditions: carrier gas: air; ramp rate: 10 °C min−1; maximum temperature: 700 °C; sample holder: alumina. Measurements were carried out with a steel furnace equipped with Type P DSC sensor. Surface area and pore textural characteristics of the carbonized PAF-1 samples were obtained from the N2 adsorption isotherms for pressures up to 1 bar measured by a volumetric method using a Micromeritics ASAP 2420 instrument at 77 K (liquid nitrogen bath). BET specific surface area (BET SSA) and pore size distribution data were calculated from the N2 adsorption isotherms using the DFT model within the Micromeritics ASAP 2420 instrument software. Two-point conductivity measurements were performed on compacted powders using an Agilent B2900 Series Precision Source/Measure Unit wired through an EmCal Genelyte Probe Station with 5 μm tipped platinum probes. Conductivity (S m−1) was calculated by the equation: , where l (m) is the distance between the probe tips, A (m2) is the cross-sectional area of the compacted sample powder and R is the resistance determined from the voltage vs. current plots.
Electrochemical measurements
Electrodes were obtained by doctor blading a slurry of 80 wt% MOLC, 10 wt% carbon black and 10 wt% PVDF on a nickel foil current collector. The amount of active material on the electrodes was measured using a microbalance of a thermogravimetric instrument with a weighing precision of 0.1 μg and was approximately 1 mg cm−2 for low-loading electrodes and 8 mg cm−2 for high-loading electrodes. The electrochemical performance of MOLC in various electrolytes was measured using a typical coin cell package (CR2032) with a pair of MOLC electrodes at ambient condition with a BioLogic Potentiostat. Glass fiber BG03013 (0.203 mm, max pore size = 15.5 μm) soaked in electrolyte was used as the separator. Open circuit potential (OCP) was monitored for at least 1 h to confirm its stability with time. A fluctuation of OCP within 10 mV for a period of 1000 s was considered as a stable potential before carrying out the electrochemical measurements. Cyclic voltammetry was performed on MOLC electrodes over a potential window of 0–1 V at various scan rates (5 mV s−1 to 2000 mV s−1) and in the presence of KOH, NaOH and LiOH electrolyte solutions. Galvanostatic charge/discharge measurements were carried out over a potential window of 0–0.7 V and 0–1 V at various current densities (0.25 A g−1, 0.5 A g−1, 1 A g−1 and 2 A g−1). Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) tests were carried out by applying a sinusoidal potential perturbation at the open circuit potential with an amplitude of 10 mV. The impedance response was measured over frequencies between 1 MHz and 10 mHz, recording 6 points per decade of frequency. Impedance analysis was carried out using PAR ZSimpWin package for Windows generally for frequencies between 100 kHz and 50 mHz to prevent misinterpretation of any artefacts that may be present in high frequency region, or scatter in the low frequency region. The resistances reported in the work are normalised per unit gram of electrode material. All the electrochemical experiments were repeated at least three times to examine the reproducibility of the electrochemical data.
Parametric calculations were conducted following the methodology of Chen et al.26 and Lou et al.27 The capacitance of the supercapacitor device (Ccell) was calculated from CV curves using: ; where Q, the total gravimetric charge is obtained by integration of the positive and negative sweeps in a CV curve, i(V) is the current, v is the sweep rate and V (V = Vmax − Vmin) represents the potential window which is 1 V in all CV measurements. The gravimetric specific capacitance Csp,g of the MOLC electrode in F g−1 was related to the capacitance of the cell, (Ccell), by: ; where mMOLC is the weight of MOLC in a single electrode. The gravimetric specific capacitance (Csp,g) and areal capacitance (Cs) based on constant current charge–discharge measurements were calculated using: , respectively; where I (A) is the constant discharge current, m is the total mass of the two electrodes, S (cm−2) is the specific surface area of the electrode, Δt (s) is the discharging time and ΔV is the voltage window, excluding the IR drop. The reported capacitances in the main text are average values for specific capacitance of cells assembled at the same condition with maximum deviation of ∼5%. The gravimetric energy stored in the device was obtained from the equation,28,29; where Ccell,g is the gravimetric capacitance of the supercapacitor in a two-electrode cell and ΔV is the operating potential window in volts. The gravimetric power density of the cells was calculated from CV curves at different scan rates using the equation28,29; where Δt is the time spent in discharge.
