2.Experimental
2.1Preparation of the solid-like composite electrolyte membranes
The detailed synthetic process of 3P(MPBIm-X) is presented in Scheme S1, ESI. The molecular characteristics of 3P(MPBIm-X)s were confirmed by the 1H NMR spectra (Fig. S1, ESI) and ATR-FT IR spectroscopy (Fig. S2, ESI).
For the fabrication of SLCE, 3P(MPBIm-TFSI) and LiTFSI were dissolved in acetonitrile and then, a certain amount of 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide (EMIM-TFSI) was added under vigorous stirring to form a homogeneous solution. The weight ratios of 3P(MPBIm-TFSI)/LiTFSI/EMIM-TFSI were set as 1/0.3/x, where x was 1, 1.5 and 2. Following that, the porous PVDF-HFP electrospun membranes were soaked in the homogeneous mixture for 6 h. After the slow evaporation of solvent at room temperature, the obtained membranes were further dried at 80 °C under vacuum for another 24 h.
2.2Instrumental techniques and electrolyte characterization
The structures of the synthesized IL monomer and PIL were confirmed by nuclear magnetic resonance (1H NMR) spectroscopy on a Bruker ARX 400 NMR spectrometer with tetramethylsilane (δ = 0) as the internal standard and DMSO-d6 as the solvent. Molecular weights of the polymers were determined by a Waters gel permeation chromatograph (GPC) using a calibration curve of polystyrene standards. Polymers were dissolved in HPLC grade DMF with a small amount of lithium bromide (LiBr) as an eluent to reduce aggregation. Infrared (IR) spectroscopy was recorded on a Shimadzu IR Prestige-21 Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR) spectrophotometer in the range of 4000–400 cm−1 by drop-casting sample solution on KBr substrates. Thermal gravimetric analysis (TGA) was obtained using a Q20 analyzer manufactured by TA instruments. The experiments were conducted under N2 atmosphere from 0 °C to 600 °C at a heating rate of 10 °C min−1. Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) was used to determine phase-transition temperatures on TA DSC Q2000 with a constant heating/cooling rate of 10 °C min−1 under continuous nitrogen purge (50 ml min−1). The efficiency of the membrane to hold IL is defined in terms of the relative absorption ratio RA, which can be calculated as follows:1M0 is the saturation mass of the membranes after absorbing the gel precursor solution. Mt is the mass of polymer electrolyte after a time interval when the saturated electrolyte has been squeezed by pressing it under load.
The ionic conductivity of the as-prepared electrolyte was measured by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) using Zahner Zennium electrochemical analyzer (IM6ex, Germany). The electrolyte was sandwiched between a pair of stainless-steel (SS) blocking electrodes with an average surface area of 2 cm2. The data was collected over a frequency range 1–105 Hz with the amplitude of 10 mV at an open circuit potential. These measurements were performed in the temperature range of 30–100 °C with the system thermally equilibrated at each selected temperature for at least 30 min. The ionic conductivity (σ) was calculated from the bulk electrolyte resistance value (Rb) according to the following equation:2where, L is the thickness of the polymer electrolyte film, S is the area of the polymer gel electrolyte film and Rb is the bulk resistance. Electrochemical stability window (ESW) of polymer electrolytes was measured by linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) at a scan rate of 5 mV s−1 from open circuit potential (OCP) to 7 V (vs. Li+/Li) for the anodic sweeps and OCP to −0.3 V for the cathodic sweeps. Lithium metal served as both counter and reference electrode and stainless steel as the working electrode. Lithium transference number (tLi+) is determined by a chronoamperometry test at 50 °C and calculated using the Bruce–Vincent–Evans equation293where, Iss is the steady-state current, Io is the initial current, ΔV is the applied potential, Rss and Ro are the interfacial resistances after and before the polarization, respectively. The current–time curve is followed by a DC polarization of 0.01 V. The interfacial stability of the electrolyte towards Li metal electrodes was monitored by measuring the time evolution of AC impedance spectra of a symmetrical Li metal/electrolyte/Li metal cell at 50 °C. Cycling performance of the electrolyte were evaluated by Li/SLCE/LiFePO4 cells and conducted in an automatic galvanostatic charge/discharge unit, Neware BTS (Shenzhen, China), over the range of 2.5–4 V, where lithium foil (battery grade) was used as anode. For pouch cell, laminated aluminum film was used to protect the battery from the outside environment. Positive electrode was fabricated by casting a mixture slurry of LiFePO4, acetylene black and PVDF in the weight ratio of 8 : 1 : 1 on aluminum foil and dried in an oven at 100 °C for 12 h.
