Experimental section
Materials
SEBS 6152 (molecular weight of 70 000, 27% styrene content) was obtained from Taipol company. 1,4-Bis(chloromethoxyl)butane (BCMB) was from Langene bio-science Co., Ltd. Anhydrous tin chloride, poly(ethylene glycol) monomethyl ether (MPEG) (350, 750 and 1000), sodium hydride (60% w/w in mineral oil) and trimethylamine aqueous solution were purchased from Aladdin Industrial Inc.
Preparation of poly(ethylene glycol) grafted SEBS-based AAEMs
To obtain a highly stable and conductive AAEM, the molecular structure of the polymer used for preparing the AAEMs was designed as shown in Fig. 1. SEBS, the main chain, possesses good flexibility and good chemical stability in alkaline conditions, which is suitable for AAEMs. The processes for the poly(ethylene glycol) grafted SEBS-based AAEMs include chloromethylation, PEG-grafting and quaternization. The synthetic routes are shown in Scheme 1. The chloromethylation of SEBS and PEG-grafting were considered to be two rather important processes that determined the properties of the PEG-grafted SEBS-based AAEMs. Therefore, the influence of CD, PEG-grafting degree and the molecular weight of PEG on the microstructure and the properties of the AAEMs were investigated in detail.
Molecular structure of the designed polymer for the preparation of AAEMs.
Synthetic routes of poly(ethylene glycol)-grafted SEBS-based AAEMs.
Chloromethylation of SEBS
The chloromethylation of SEBS was achieved by the reaction of SEBS polymer and BCMB catalyzed by anhydrous tin chloride. The chloromethylation degree of SEBS could be effectively modulated by controlling the reaction temperature and reaction time. The procedure was as follows: SEBS (2 g) was dissolved in CCl4 (30 mL) at 40 °C. Anhydrous tin chloride (0.5 mL) was added into the solution at 5 °C, followed by the dropwise addition of BCMB (3 mL). The mixture was stirred below 20 °C for a period of time and poured into ethanol to precipitate the product. The crude product was dissolved in THF and then precipitated again by ethanol. After being washed several times with ethanol and water, the product was dried under vacuum at room temperature.
Preparation of PEG-grafted SEBS-based membranes
The grafting of PEG onto the SEBS main chain was achieved by the reaction of SEBS chloride and poly(ethylene glycol) monomethyl ether (MPEG). The above synthesized SEBS chloride was dissolved in THF (3% w/v). A certain amount of MPEG was added into the solution and NaH was slowly added. The mixture was allowed to react at 40 °C for 14 h. Then it was poured into ethanol to obtain a light yellow and slightly transparent solid. The product was dried under vacuum at 30 °C. Finally, the PEG-grafted SEBS-based membranes were prepared by the hot-pressed method with 20 000 pounds pressure at 120 °C.
Quaternization of PEG-grafted SEBS-based membranes
The above prepared membranes were quaternized by immersing them in trimethylamine aqueous solution at room temperature for 24 h. The membranes could be changed into OH− form via treating them in in their Cl− form in 1 M KOH solution at room temperature for two days. The membranes were denoted as QA-SEBSx-g-PEGy-M (QA is quaternary ammoniums, x is chloromethylation degree (CD), y is PEG-grafting degree and M is the molecular weight of MPEG).
NMR spectra
1H NMR spectra were recorded on a Bruker ACIII 400 spectrometer. CD of SEBS and PEG-grafting degree (x and y) could be calculated by the relative integrated intensities of the 1H resonances (as shown in Fig. S1, CDCl3 as solvent).
Morphological characterization
The morphologies of the membranes were characterized by transmission electron microscopy (TEM) using a JEM-2100 microscope operating at an accelerating voltage of 200 kV. TEM sections were prepared using an ultracryomicrotome. For observation, these samples were stained by exposure to H2PtCl6 (in ethylene glycol). The TEM data represent partially hydrated films that have been equilibrated under ambient conditions.
Ionic conductivity of the membranes
The resistance values of the AAEMs were measured over the frequency range from 1 Hz to 1 MHz by alternating current (ac) impedance spectroscopy, using an electrode system connected with a Solartron 1287 electrochemical workstation and a Solartron 1260 gain-phase analyzer. All samples were placed in deionized water and equilibrated for at least 30 min at a given temperature. The membranes were repeatedly conducted three times.
The in-plane conductivity was calculated as follows:where σ is the conductivity of the membrane in S cm−1, L is the length of the membrane between sensor II and reference electrodes in cm, W and T are the width and thickness of the membrane in cm, respectively. R is the resistance of the membrane in ohms.
Ion exchange capacity (IEC), water uptake (WU), swelling degree (SD) and absorbed water capacity (λ) of the membranes
The IEC of the AAEMs was determined by the back-titration method. The AAEMs in OH-form were immersed in 10 mL 0.01 mol L−1 HCl solution for two days. Then the solutions were titrated with 0.01 M KOH solution using a pH meter to determine the titration-end point. IEC values were calculated using the following expression:where V0KOH and ViKOH are the volumes of the KOH consumed in the titration without and with membranes, respectively, CKOH was the molar concentration of KOH, and mdry is the mass of the dried membrane in OH− form.
The WU and the SD of the membranes in OH− form are calculated from the weight and dimension differences of membranes after soaking in deionized water for 48 h at room temperature and after drying in a vacuum oven at 60 °C.
The WU is calculated by the equation as follows:where Wwet and Wdry are the weight of wet and dry membranes in OH− forms in grams, respectively.
The SD was calculated by the equation as follows:where Lwet and Ldry are the geometric width of the wet and dry membranes in OH− forms, respectively.
The number of absorbed water molecules per functional group, λ, was calculated using the following equation:
Thermomechanical stability of AAEMs
The thermomechanical performances of the grafted SEBS-based AAEMs were tested by DMA using a Q800 dynamic mechanical analyzer from TA Instruments in the stretching mode. The samples were heated from 100 to 300 °C at a heating rate of 3 °C min−1 under a dry air atmosphere. A frequency of 1 Hz and a displacement amplitude of 30 μm were used in all DMA measurements.
Alkaline stability of AAEMs
The alkaline stability of the membranes was monitored by measuring the changes of the ionic conductivity, dimensions and IEC values of the membrane before and after being immersed in 2.5 M KOH solution at 60 °C. Prior to testing the conductivity, dimensions and IEC, the membranes were thoroughly washed with deionized water until the conductivity of the water used for washing the membranes was 1.86 μS cm−1.
Single cell tests
The single cell was fabricated by using 70 wt% Pt/C (Johnson Matthey) with a metal loading of 0.5 mg cm−2 as both anode and cathode catalysts. Quaternized polystyrene polymer was used as the ionomer with a 20% loading at both electrodes. Then the catalyst ink was sprayed onto the AAEMs to obtain catalyst-coated membranes (CCMs). The membrane electrode assemblies (MEAs) were prepared by hot-pressing the CCM between two gas diffusion layers (GDLs). The MEA in which the ionomer was in OH form was prepared by immersing the above prepared MEA in 1 M KOH solution at room temperature for 48 h. Before being tested, this MEA was thoroughly washed with deionized water. Cells with a 5 cm2 active area were assembled using stainless steel end-plates. Fuel cell tests were carried out with H2 and O2 at 50 °C with 100% relative humidity (RH). The flow rates of H2 and O2 were 100 and 200 mL min−1 with a 0.2 MPa backpressure, respectively. The MEAs were activated by operating at the constant current densities (100, 200 and 300 mA cm−2). After the activation, the fuel cell polarization curve was measured under dynamic current mode. The cell voltage as a function of current density was recorded using fuel cell testing software.
