Conclusions
We have systematically studied the electronic and mechanical properties, lattice dynamics, defect chemistry, and Li+ migration mechanisms of the antiperovskite Li3OCl from first principles calculations. The optimized lattice constant is in excellent agreement with the experimental values, indicating that the computational method and parameters used in this study are reasonable. The Li3OCl has a very strong ionic nature with a wide band gap (6.26 eV) between the occupied O 2p states and unoccupied Li 2s states. The calculated mechanical properties of Li3OCl suggest that Li3OCl is brittle (B/G &lt; 1.75), which is not favorable for its application as a SSE. It is also found that Li3OCl is softer than LLTO and LLZO, but is stiffer than LGPS. In addition, phonon calculations confirm that a Li3OCl structure is dynamically stable at its ground state, as no imaginary frequencies are observed in the phonon dispersion curve. We also find that the volume change of Li3OCl is relatively small during practical operation. The calculated thermal conductivity shows that heat transport in Li3OCl can be much faster than in Li1+xAlxGe2−x(PO4)3.
The study of Li diffusion mechanisms in Li3OCl indicates that Li diffusion is strongly dependent on the types of defects. The calculations of energetics of the four charge neutral defect pairs reveal that the formation energy of the  defect pair is the lowest, compared to , , and  pairs. Interstitial Li can be created from both  and  pairs; however, the strong trapping effect of  to  makes it less contributive to Li+ conductivity. A Li-vacancy can be created through , , and  defect pairs. However, the trapping effect in  defect also makes the contribution from the  defect pair to Li+ conductivity negligible. The energy barriers for interstitial Li and Li-vacancy are estimated to be ∼0.12 eV and 0.30 eV, respectively, and corresponding to the diffusion coefficient approximately 10−4 and 10−7 cm2 s−1. Therefore,  and  defect pairs are the two most important types of defect pairs for Li+ conductivity. The former one creates more Li-vacancies as its defect formation energy is low, while the mobility of the Li-vacancy is relatively slow. The latter one has higher defect formation energy and creates a small amount of interstitial Li that can diffuse very fast. Overall, our work provides a comprehensive understanding on the basic bulk properties of Li3OCl and theoretical basis for practical application of Li3OCl in all-solid-state LMBs.
