Experimental
Synthesis
LZP and Ca-doped LZP (LZP-Ca) phases are prepared by a modified sol–gel approach.9 Typically, solid citric acid and EDTA (dissolved in NH3 solution) were added to a solution containing stoichiometric amounts of lithium acetate (99.95%) and zirconium oxynitrate hydrate (99%) in dilute nitric acid. The molar ratio of total metal ions to EDTA and to citrate was 1 : 1 : 2. Dilute NH3 solution was used to adjust the pH value of the solution to a value &gt;7, then few drops of H2O2 and a stoichiometric amount of NH4H2PO4 (≥98.0%) were added to the mixture. The resulting clear solution was evaporated at ∼110 °C to form a transparent gel, which was dried and burnt in air at 550 °C for 12 h. The resulting solid precursor is pressed into pellets and calcined for 50 min at 1100 °C, followed by quenching to room temperature. LTP is synthesized by the procedure described in ref. 13.
Characterization
X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis was performed using a PANalytical X'Pert PRO diffractometer in reflection mode using Cu-Kα radiation. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) studies were performed using Carl Zeiss Sigma variable pressure analytical electron microscope. The machine is equipped with an angle selective backscattered electron detector (AsB), to obtain a materials contrast image. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) analysis was performed using a Thermo Scientific K-Alpha + X-ray Photoelectron Spectrometer system operating at a base pressure of 2 × 10−9 mbar. This system incorporates a monochromated, microfocused Al Kα X-ray source (hν = 1486.6 eV), which was operated a 6 mA emission current and 12 kV anode bias. The system includes a 180° double focusing hemispherical analyser coupled with a 2D detector. Data were collected at 200 eV pass energy for survey and 20 eV pass energy for core level spectra using an X-ray spot size of 400 μm. A flood gun was used to minimize sample charging. Spectra were aligned assuming the C 1s core line to be at a binding energy of 285.0 eV. All data were analysed using the Avantage software package.
AC impedance measurements were recorded using a Solartron 1260 impedance analyser and a BioLogic VSP potentiostat in the frequency range of 1 MHz to 1 Hz with an electrical perturbation of 50 mV. As-prepared pellets were polished by SiC sandpaper up to 1200 grit to ensure flat surfaces before use. The thickness of the pellets was 1.4–1.5 mm, and the area of the electrodes was 0.5 or 0.636 cm2. For measurements with Au electrodes, Au was gas-phase deposited onto both sides of the pellet by thermal evaporation. For measurements with lithium electrodes, cells were prepared in an Ar-filled glovebox where pellets were sandwiched between two lithium foils (Sigma Aldrich, 0.38 mm) in Swagelok cells using stainless steel current collectors. The surfaces of the used lithium foils were scratched using a stainless steel blade to obtain fresh surfaces before use. Prior to each measurement, the cell was equilibrated at the desired temperature (50 or 80 °C) for 2 hours. No prior heat treatments were performed, e.g. to improve the contact between LZP and Li. For samples with Au buffer layers, thin layers of Au were sputtered onto both sides of the pellets by using a sputter coater (Polaron SC7640). The sputtering time was 20 s, using 20 mA sputtering current and an Ar pressure of ∼0.02 mbar. The constant current galvanostatic cycling was performed using a BioLogic VSP potentiostat by applying a constant current for 2 h, followed by a 10 min OCV before switching to the opposing current direction.
Li/LZP/LTP solid-state cell
A slurry containing LTP and PVDF binder (80 : 20 wt%) in NMP is used to prepare the LTP electrode. The LTP slurry is coated on one side of the LZP pellet, dried at 50 °C, and the pellet is heated slowly to 350 °C (∼2 °C min−1), and then fired to 1100 °C at 10 °C min−1. After 10 minutes sintering the sample is quenched to room temperature. An Au layer is then gas-phase deposited on top of LTP to collect the current from the cathode. A thin Au buffer layer is then deposited on the bare side of the pellet followed by attaching Li to this side as the negative electrode in an Ar-filled glovebox. A Swagelok cell with stainless steel current collectors is used to contain the battery.
