Experimental section
Materials preparation
The C6H4NH2CuBr2I precursor solutions were formed by dissolving equimolar 0.459 g of 2-iodoaniline (C6H4NH2I) and 0.461 g of copper(ii) bromide (CuBr2) in 1 mL dimethylformamide (DMF) and then stirred at 60 °C overnight. The mixed solution was treated by ultra-sonication for 30 min and then filtered by using PTFE syringe filters (0.45 μm), finally achieving a clear dark solution. The C6H4NH2CuBr2I films used for materials characterization were prepared by the spin-coating method at 1500 rpm for 40 s, followed by annealing on a hot plate at 70 °C for 60 min. The molar ratio of C6H4NH2I : CuBr2 can be varied slightly to get different precursor solutions.
Device fabrication
The C6H4NH2CuBr2I films based on glass substrates were patterned with two gold electrodes by thermal evaporation (3 mm in width, 3 mm in length, 100–120 nm in thickness and 6 mm apart from each other).
Characterization and measurements
X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements were performed on an X-ray Diffractometer (Rigaku, Ultima IV) with Cu Kα radiation. The absorption spectrum of the C6H4NH2CuBr2I film was obtained using a UV-Vis Spectrophotometer (Shimadzu, UV3600). Ultraviolet Photoelectron Spectroscopy (UPS) was conducted on a multifunctional photoelectron spectrometer (Kratos AXIS-ULTRA DLD-600W) using He I radiation with photon energy (hν = 21.22 eV). The photoluminescence measurements were performed by using a Fluorescence Spectrometer (Edinburgh Instrument, FLS 920).
Au electrodes are used for both Seebeck coefficient and electrical conductivity measurements. The electrical conductivity of the C6H4NH2CuBr2I film at different temperatures was measured by using Electrical &amp; Test Equipment (Keithley 2400) by a two-probe method according to Ohm's law. The Au/C6H4NH2CuBr2I/Au shows linear DC current–voltage characteristics and the contacts between Au and C6H4NH2CuBr2I film were found to approximate Ohmic contacts. The electrical conductivity obtained by the two-probe method and Hall effect method at room temperature had similar values.
During the measurements of the Seebeck coefficient for the C6H4NH2CuBr2I sample, the temperature difference was provided by a homemade temperature controlling system, which consists of a Teflon holder specially designed for the sample test, a DC power supply (Tektronix) and a heater–cooler pair. The metallic ceramic heater (HT24S, ThorLabs) and metallic cooler were put respectively under two sides of the sample to provide a temperature difference. The samples and heater–cooler pair were fixed on the Teflon scaffold for stable measurements. The temperature controlling system maintained temperature differences during a certain time period. The voltage difference between the two Au electrodes was measured and recorded by using a nanovoltmeter (ΔV) (National Instruments, Inc., NI PXIe-1073). ΔV is averaged by reversing the polarity of each Seebeck measurement to eliminate the unipolar and off-set voltages. The temperature difference (ΔT) and average temperature (T) of the sample were obtained from the hot side and cold side temperatures of the sample measured with two K-type thermocouples, as shown in Fig. 8(a). The Seebeck coefficient is defined as . The error in the Seebeck coefficient due to the geometry of the Au electrodes was estimated to be about 4%. The electrical conductivity and Seebeck coefficient were measured from room temperature to 95 °C.
The schematic diagram of measurements for the Au/C6H4NH2CuBr2I/Au sample: (a) thermoelectric voltage (VTE) and (b) thermoelectric current (ITE) at different ΔT.
The C6H4NH2CuBr2I sample was electrically wired in series with different modules, which can be switched to measure the thermoelectric voltage (VTE) and thermoelectric current (ITE), respectively. As shown in Fig. 8, the thermoelectric voltage of the sample was measured by using a nanovoltmeter, NI PXIe-1073, and the thermoelectric current was measured by using a Precision Measure Unit (Agilent, B2901A). In the module of NI PXIe-1073, the thermoelectric voltage (VTE) was recorded under open-circuit conditions with temperature difference ΔT along the in-plane direction of the C6H4NH2CuBr2I film, while the thermoelectric current (ITE) was measured under short-circuit conditions with almost the same ΔT in the module of B2901A.
