2Experimental
2.1Materials
PVDF was purchased from Arkema Co., Ltd., China. HEC (3400–5000 MPa s, 25 °C) was supplied by Macklin Biochemical Co., Ltd., China. N,N-Dimethyl formamide (DMF) was obtained from Tianjin Damao Chemistry Reagent Factory. Dimethyl carbonate (DMC) was purchased from Guangzhou Tinci Materials Technology Co., Ltd. The polyethylene (PE) separator (Celgard 2400, Celgard LLC, America) with a thickness of 16 μm was used as the polymer matrix of coatings and a contrast sample. The cathode material used in this research was LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4 powder from XingNeng New Materials Co., Ltd., China. An electrolyte consisting of 1 mol L−1 LiPF6 in a solvent of ethylene carbonate (EC)–diethyl carbonate (DEC) (1/3 v/v, Guangzhou Tinci Material Technology Co., Ltd) was employed.
2.2Preparation of composite separators
The coating solutions were prepared by the following steps. First, PVDF and HEC powders with different weight ratios (1 : 1, 2 : 1, 3 : 1 and 4 : 1) were mixed into DMF solvent; the slurry became uniform after 2 hours of magnetic stirring at 60 °C. Then, DMC (DMF : DMC = 9 : 1, by weight) was added to the solution homogeneously, which created a solid content of 0.5 wt% as the solution cooled to room temperature.
After vigorous stirring for 4 h, a microporous PE separator (16 μm) was immersed in the resulting coating solutions for 15 min and was then taken out, vertically mounted and dried in air for 1 h before being placed in a vacuum oven at 60 °C for 24 h. PE-supported PVDF/HEC ultra-thin blended polymer separators were obtained. Finally, the composite separator was soaked in organic electrolyte solution in an argon-filled glovebox to produce the gel polymer electrolyte for further measurement.
2.3Characterization
The thickness of the separators was measured with a micrometer (Mitutoyo, Japan). The morphology of the prepared separators was observed via scanning electron microscopy (SEM) (ZEISS Ultra 55, Germany). The Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectra of the PE and the PE-supported polymer separators were measured using an FTIR Spectrometer (Nicolet 6700, America). X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was conducted on an ESCALAB 250Xi (Thermo Scientific) with an Al Kα X-ray source (1486.6 eV) to analyse the compositions of the coated surfaces. The mechanical properties of the separators were measured on an Electromechanical Universal Testing Machine (CMT 6104, MTS Systems Co., Ltd., China) at a tensile speed of 50 mm min−1 longitudinally at room temperature. The thermal properties of the composite separators were studied by thermogravimetric analysis (TGA7, PerkinElmer, America) from room temperature to 800 °C at a heating rate of 10 °C min−1 under a N2 atmosphere. The pristine PE separator and the coated separators were punched into disks with a diameter of 19 mm, and the thermal shrinkage of the separators was evaluated by heating the separators in an oven at 150 °C for 0.5 h. The electrolyte contact angles were measured on a contact angle meter (JC2000D3P, Shanghai Zhongchen Digital Technology Equipment Co., Ltd., China) by the sessile drop method with 5 μL of electrolyte.
2.4Electrochemical performance evaluation
The ionic conductivities (σ) of the GPEs at room temperature were determined by conducting electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) using cells consisting of a GPE sandwiched between two circular stainless steel (SS) electrodes. The impedance spectra of the SS/GPE/SS cells were measured on an electrochemical workstation with a potential amplitude of 5 mV from 100 kHz to 0.1 Hz. The ionic conductivity was calculated from the following equation:1σ = L/(Rb × S),where L is the thickness of the separators, Rb is the bulk electrolyte resistance, and S is the contact area between the separators and the stainless steel electrodes.
The electrochemical stability window of the polymer electrolyte was examined by linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) in a cell with stainless steel as the working electrode and lithium foil as the counter and reference electrodes. The measurement was done on an electrochemical workstation (CHI660E, Chenhua, Shanghai) in the Li/GPE/SS cell at a scan rate of 1 mV s−1 between 2.5 and 6.0 V.
Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) was carried out on the electrochemical workstation in a frequency range between 0.1 and 100 kHz using the Li/GPE/Li cell.
Coin cells (2025-type) were assembled by sandwiching separators between the cathode (LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4/carbon black/PVDF, 80/10/10, w/w/w) and the lithium metal anode. The charge–discharge testing, cycling stability evaluation and C-rate capability evaluation of the Li/GPE/LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4 cells were conducted on a battery testing system (CT-3008, Neware, China) between 3.5 V and 5.0 V at room temperature.
