2.Experimental section
2.1Synthesis of N-CNs/S composite materials
To prepare the N-CNs, 5.0 g ZnCl2 and 13.5 g FeCl3 were respectively dissolved in 35 mL deionized water to obtain a grey solution. Then 2.0 g natural silkworm cocoon (Jiaxing, China) was soaked in this solution with continuous stirring at 60 °C for 6 h. This solution was dried at 80 °C in a blast oven to obtain a brown precursor. Then, the precursor was annealed in a tube furnace at 900 °C for 1 h with a ramp rate of 5 °C min−1 in a flowing nitrogen atmosphere. The obtained product was washed with 0.5 M HCl and deionized water, then dried in an oven at 80 °C for 24 h. Finally, N-CNs were obtained and collected.
The N-CNs/S composite materials were prepared using a thermal diffusion method. N-CNs were mixed with sublimed sulfur (w/w = 1 : 3) using CS2 as solvent. When the carbon and sulfur was homogeneously mixed it was pressed into a pellet and heated at 155 °C for 12 h in a vacuum oven. With this thermal treatment, sulfur can adequately diffuse into the carbon's structure.
After naturally cooling to room temperature, the N-CNs/S composites were obtained. A control group of carbon black/S composite was fabricated using the same method.
2.2Synthesis of IL@NPs
First, 1-methylimidazole (Aldrich, USA) was mixed with a stoichiometric amount of (3-chloropropyl)trimethoxysilane (Aldrich, USA) in dimethylformamide solution and stirred at 80 °C for 40 h. The resulting solution was purified in ether and the solvent was evaporated at room temperature over 24 h to produce 1-methyl-3-trimethoxysilane imidazolium chloride (ILCl).
Second, zirconia (ZrO2, 36 nm, Aldrich, USA) was dispersed in deionized water to produce a 2 wt% aqueous suspension, then ILCl was added to this aqueous suspension drop by drop at 80 °C with mild stirring. As the mixture was stirred for 12 h, the temperature was increased to 100 °C in order to volatilize the deionized water. Then, the functionalized ionic liquid (ILCl@ZrO2) was washed with ethanol several times and collected by centrifugation. Silica (SiO2, 15 nm, Aldrich, USA) and Titania (TiO2, 21 nm, Aldrich, USA) were grafted with ILCl via the same methods, obtaining ILCl@SiO2 and ILCl@TiO2.
Lastly, ILCl@ZrO2 and LiTFSI with a mol ratio of 1 : 1 were dissolved and reacted in deionized water to exchange Cl− with TFSI−, thus obtaining IL@ZrO2. The resulting substances were washed 5–6 times with deionized water to remove residual Cl− and then collected after centrifugation. After drying the sample, it was dissolved in acetone again to remove unreacted zirconia and dried at 80 °C for 24 h. IL@SiO2 and IL@TiO2 were obtained using the same methods.
2.3Fabrication of battery
70% active material (N-CNs/S) or carbon black/S, a 10% conductive additive of acetylene black, 15% poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO), and 5% LiTFSI were mixed with acetonitrile to obtain a thick slurry under continuous stirring for 6 h. Then the slurry was coated onto aluminum foil with a glass rod and the resulting cathode was dried at 60 °C for 12 h in a vacuum oven. To prepare the SSPEs, first, PEO and LiTFSI (w/w = 15 : 1) were dissolved in acetonitrile under magnetic stirring for 3 h. Later, 20 wt% IL@NPs was added into the former solution with continued stirring for 9 h. Finally, the electrolyte was coated onto the N-CNs/S cathode electrode directly, and the electrode was dried at 60 °C for 8 h.
Half-cells were assembled with a 2025 coin-type cell in a glove box containing an argon atmosphere (O2 ≤ 0.1 ppm, H2O ≤ 0.1 ppm). N-CNs/S composites or carbon black/S composites were used as a working electrode and lithium metal foil as the counter electrode and reference electrode, respectively. SSPEs were used as both separator and electrolyte.
2.4Characterization
X-ray diffraction (XRD, PANalytical, Netherlands) patterns of N-CNs were conducted and recorded on an X' Pert Pro diffractometer using Cu-Kα radiation (λ = 0.15418 nm). Data was collected within the 2-theta range of 10–80°. Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET, Micromeritics, America) tests were determined with an ASAP 2020 physical adsorption analyze; the specific surface area was calculated using BET theory. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS, Shimadzu, Hongkong) measurements were performed on a Thermo ESCALAB 250 system with a monochromatic Al-Kα (1486.6 eV) X-ray source. Raman spectra (JOBIN YVON, France) were obtained under a backscattering geometry (1532 nm) to characterize structural disorder degree of the samples. The morphology of SSPEs, IL@NPs and N-CNs was observed by scanning electron microscopy (SEM, Hitachi S-4800, Japan) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM, FEI, Netherlands, Tecnai G2 F30). Elemental analysis was performed using an energy dispersive X-ray (EDX) spectrometer attached to TEM.
Ionic conductivities of dried SSPEs were calculated from electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements. The EIS was tested with a CHI660E electrochemical workstation (Chenhua, shanghai) using an electrochemical cell equipped with two stainless steel (SS) electrodes. The EIS were performed in a frequency range of 10−2 to 105 Hz and the data were collected within a temperature range of 25–80 °C in stepwise increments of 10 °C. Flammability tests of both SSPEs (PEO–Li–Zr electrolytes), liquid electrolytes (1 M LiTFSI and 0.1 M LiNO3 dissolved in a mixture of 1,3-dioxolane (DOL), and dimethoxymethane (DME) (v/v = 1 : 1)) were directly performed using a burning torch heater. Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC, TA Instruments, America) studies were carried out with a heating rate of 10 °C min−1 from −60 to 140 °C in the heating cycle, and sample weights were maintained in a range of 8–10 mg. Linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) was tested using a coin cell composed of a lithium metal anode, SSPEs, and a stainless steel cathode in a CHI660E electrochemical workstation (Chenhua, shanghai). And the LSV was performed with a scanning rate of 0.5 mV S−1 at 37 °C to evaluate electrochemical stabilities of the SSPEs. Galvanostatic discharge/charge tests of solid-state batteries were performed in a potential range of 1.8–2.6 V (versus Li+/Li) at 37 and 50 °C using a Neware battery test system (Neware, Shenzhen). All specific capacities were calculated using the mass of the active sulfur.
