4Conclusion
In this work, the strategy of UV assisted in situ GPE generation adopted for the fabrication of an all-solid-state, non-aqueous, flexible supercapacitor devices is found to mimic an electrode–electrolyte interface close in nature to that of a liquid electrolyte. The GPE shows excellent ionic conductivity (4.7 × 10−3 S cm−1) and mechanical properties. The higher solvent holding capability augmented with the excellent mechanical stability of the GPE arises as a result of the various covalent and non-covalent cross-links present in the GPE. The effect of functional groups present in the monomer in promoting the feasibility of the in situ GPE is confirmed by comparing two monomers, viz., HPA and MMA. The existing trade-off between the higher solvent holding ability of the GPE and the mechanical stability is minimised to an extent by this work. The all-solid-state flexible supercapacitors fabricated using the above mentioned strategy exhibits a very low ESR (2.20 Ω) at a higher (4.0 mg cm−2) and a lower (2.5 mg cm−2) mass loading of the active electrode material. Thus it is concluded that an effective electrode–electrolyte interface is achievable irrespective of the electrode mass loading, when the in situ polymerisation strategy is adopted for supercapacitor device fabrication. Thus even thicker electrodes can be used for supercapacitor device fabrication, which is indeed important from a commercial aspect. A 4 cm2 device with an electrode mass loading of 3.8 mg cm−2 (H-P-L-3M-S-3.8) fabricated using the in situ polymer generation strategy is found to provide a mass specific capacitance of 113 F g−1, when operated in a potential window of 2.0 V. The strategy is scaled-up to a large area (16 cm2) with a high mass loading of 4 mg cm−2 for the preparation of an all-solid-state flexible supercapacitor device (H-P-L-3M-S-4.0). The device is found to show a capacitance of 111 F g−1 at a current density of 1 mA cm−2 (0.25 A g−1), when operated at a voltage window of 2.5 V. The same device shows an energy density of 6.51 W h kg−1 at a power density of 3255 W kg−1. Even though in this report we have shown the viability of the strategy towards the supercapacitor design, it can be further extended for the fabrication of other electrochemical devices such as metal-ion batteries, metal-air batteries etc.
