Conclusions
A series of binary and ternary polymeric compositions that incorporate a lithiated anionic polymer entrapped within a semi-IPN matrix were successfully synthesized, evaluated and showcased as a new class of quasi-solid fast single-ion conductors. The key factors investigated to determine their effect on the overall electrochemical properties of these composites are (i) polymer–polymer/ion–polymer interactions (ii) phase homogeneity, (iii) effect of oligomeric plasticization, (iv) transition temperatures and thermostability, and (v) H-bonding and degree of crystallinity. Confirmation on the formation, phase homogeneity and morphology was substantiated comprehensively prior to the physicochemical and electrochemical property evaluation. Exercising suitable control over several parameters (i.e. –NCO/–OH ratio, amount of solvent, catalyst, etc.) and ratio of the constituents in the compositions, the polymer–polymer interactions, phase mixing and morphology can be tuned as desired. Inherent plasticization offered by oligomeric PEGDME also indicates enhanced inter-/intra-chain interactions and entanglements leading to a softer flexible matrix. Thermal studies on the series of binary compositions, PEG-PU : P(SPM−·Li+) reveal that the rigid and brittle character of the lithiated anionic polymer can be reasonably altered to obtain a considerably flexible matrix. The progressive change in the degree of crystallinity and noticeable splitting in the broad melting endotherms of the ternary compositions indicate the extensive role of H-bonding interactions within interlocked macromolecular chain segments. Encouragingly, the glass transition temperature of the matrix bulk remained significantly low (&lt;−40 °C) even at higher loading of the lithiated anionic polymer. This suggests a very conducive micro-environment for ionic transport assisted by the wriggling and rearrangement of the polymeric segments. All the compositions demonstrate appreciable thermal stability up to ∼160 °C, which satisfies an essential pre-requisite relating to performance and safety.
Comprehensive evaluation of ionic conductivity, micro-environment of the ion, mechanism of ion-conduction, activation energy, polarization, cationic transport and electrochemical stability were assessed in considerable detail. In-depth analysis of the Nyquist plots obtained from temperature-step electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) established a plausible physical model for the system. Co-existence of the intimately mixed binary and ternary phases provided crucial leads toward understanding the possible mechanism of single-ion conduction in this new class of quasi-solid matrix. Three interesting observations were particularly apparent: (a) an Arrhenius to V–T–F transition invariably occurred at ∼50 °C associated with the melting of the crystalline domains; (b) preferential molecular interactions of P(SPM−·Li+) with incorporation of PEGDME favourably influenced ionic mobility; and (c) unlike the Grotthuss mechanism foreseen for single-ion conduction, the findings strongly indicates that the charge transport is preferentially promoted within the ether cages that act as ion channels. The presence of at least 10–25 free ethylene oxide (EO) units per Li+-cation promotes faster ionic conduction similar to conventional salt in polymer complexes. Linear sweep voltammetry displays an irreversible oxidation beyond 4.7 V, which confirms appreciable electrochemical stability. Chronoamperometric evaluations of the cationic transport number reveal an impressive tLi+ &gt; 0.87 at ambient temperatures. Overall, bulk ionic conductivity (σ) obtained for the optimized compositions are estimated to be within the range of ∼10−4 to 10−5 S cm−1 in the temperature window of the study and holds excellent promise for further improvement. Thus, the design strategy and synthetic approach employed to realize the macromolecular architecture; phase homogeneity, morphology and thermal characteristics achieved; coupled with ion-dissociation, solvation, internal Brownian motions and electrochemical stability, all complement each other to support rapid ionic conduction with high cationic transport numbers in an all solid-state electrolyte matrix. Early feasibility studies of these quasi-solid matrices demonstrated in LiFePO4 systems were undeniably encouraging but further optimization of the parameters with enhanced performance remains to be achieved. To sum up, these reassuring and promising results favourably indicate the potential of effectively tailoring lithiated anionic polymers and opens up a prospective option to accomplish fast single-ion conduction suitable for device applications.
