2.Experimental
2.1.Materials
Technical grade nylon-6,6 (medium viscous, DSM Co., The Netherlands) and syndiotactic polypropylene (syn-PP) (Mw = 174 000; Mn = 75 000, Aldrich) were used to prepare nanofibrous sheets using an electrospinner (Nanolab Instruments). A mixture of meta- and para-isomers of vinylbenzyl chloride (VBC), 1,8-octanediamine (ODA), polyoxyethylene sorbitan monolaurate (Tween-20), decalin, chloromethylmethylether, bis(trifluoromethane)sulfonamide, poly(diallyldimethylammonium chloride) (average Mw 400 000–500 000, 20 wt% in H2O) (poly(DADMAC)) and trimethylamine were all of analytical grade and purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. All other reagents and solvents were of analytical grade and used as received. Nanofibrous sheets with respective mean diameters of 90 nm (nylon-6,6) and 335 nm (syn-PP) were prepared following reports published elsewhere.43,44 Typically, a solution of 7.5 wt% syn-PP was obtained by dissolving polymer granules in a mixture of 8/1/1 (v/v) of decalin, acetone and dimethylformamide at 65 °C. The solution was electrospun at an applied voltage of 16 kV, a needle tip to collector distance of 20 cm, a collector drum rotation speed of 500 rpm and a flow rate of 4 mL min−1. Similarly, a polymer solution of 18 wt% concentrated nylon-6,6 was prepared in a solvent mixture of 9/1 (v/v) of formic acid and water in a glass reactor. The polymer solution was electrospun at an applied voltage of 20 kV, a distance of 12 cm between the tip of the metal needle and the collector, a solution flow rate of 0.3–0.4 mL h−1 and a collector drum rotation speed of 300 rpm. The obtained electrospun mats were dried at 80 °C in a vacuum oven prior to use. Fig. S1 and S2 show typical SEM micrographs of electrospun nanofibers. Two different binders of fluorinated poly(DADMAC) and quaternary ammonium polysulfone (QAPS) with IECs of 0.38 and 1.1 meq. g−1 were prepared based on the reported procedures.45,46
2.2.Characterization and measurements
Line profiling of the nanofiber diameter was obtained with a Park NX10 atomic force microscope (AFM) in a non-contact mode. An Innova® AFM (BRUKER) was used for surface morphology evaluation of the membranes in a tapping mode. SEM images of the samples were obtained on a Philips XL30 field emission scanning electron microscope (FE-SEM) after coating with 5 nm Au. The cross-sectional morphology was examined using samples cryofractured in liquid nitrogen. BET (Brunauer–Emmett–Teller) analysis of the electrospun substrates was performed with an automated nitrogen sorption system (Autosorb iQ/MPXR, Quantachrome Instruments) in a relative desorption/adsorption pressure range of 0.025–0.997. The obtained isotherms at 77.3 K were used to calculate the specific surface areas, pore volumes and sizes of the substrates. Transmission electron microscope (TEM) images were obtained with a TECNAI G2 F20 at an accelerating voltage of 200 kV. The samples were prepared by embedding the films in epoxy resin and sectioning with an ultramicrotome (Boeckeler RMC X) at room temperature. Staining of the samples was performed by OsO4 vapor exposure (from 4% aqueous solution) for 2 h. A LECO CHNS-932 Elemental Analyzer was used to perform elemental analysis of C, H and N. Fourier transform-infrared attenuated total reflection (FT-IR-ATR) analysis was performed using a Thermo Fisher Scientific Nicolet iS50 spectrometer. The chemical composition and binding energy of the membrane surface were examined by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) using a PHI Quantera II Scanning XPS Microprobe with a monochromatic radiation source of an Al Kα anode (1486.6 eV) at a pressure &lt;2 × 10−6 bar at room temperature. Peak integration was carried out followed by deconvolution of the C 1s and N 1s peaks by assuming a Gaussian line shape. Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) was performed on a TA instrument TGA-Q 50 under a nitrogen atmosphere in a temperature range of 25–600 °C and at a heating rate of 10 °C min−1. Mechanical tensile strength testing of the AEMs (in the Cl− counterion form) was performed using a universal mechanical tester (SANTAM, STM-20) at room temperature and at a stretching speed of 2 mm min−1 until failure.
The theoretical IEC (IECtheo) value was calculated based on the grafting yield and the assumption of 100% amination. For crosslinked samples, mmol of VBC was calculated based on the weight changes after crosslinking according to eqn (S1). The experimental value of IEC (IECexp, mmol Cl− per g of dried polymer) was determined via the Mohr titration method. This method is advantageous in terms of elimination of the membrane exposure to either alkali or acidic conditions and therefore the degradation risk and negative impacts of CO2 absorption on OH− conductivity are minimized. The samples were initially dried in a vacuum oven at 80 °C overnight and their dry mass was recorded. Chloride ions in the membranes were released and replaced by nitrate ions through soaking them in 20 mL of 0.1 M sodium nitrate solution under stirring for 1 day. To ensure complete exchange of chloride ions, the procedure was repeated. The resulting solution was titrated against 0.1 M standard silver nitrate solution, using potassium chromate as an indicator. The value was calculated as a mmol of used silver nitrate (which is equivalent to mmol of Cl− released from the membrane) per gram of the membrane sample. The measurement was performed for at least two samples from the same polymer and the calculated IEC is an average of three replications. The portion of accessible ion exchange capacity (IECacc) was defined as the ratio of theoretical IEC to experimental value.
Water uptake (ϕw), which is defined as the change in the membrane mass (in the OH− form) after soaking in water for 24 h, was calculated using eqn (1).1where Wwet is the weight of the wet membrane after taking out from water and removing excess water by wiping with a tissue paper, and Wdry is the weight of the membrane thoroughly dried in a vacuum oven at 80 °C for 24 h. The water content of the membranes is expressed as a hydration number or water-uptake coefficient (λ-value), which is the number of water molecules present in the membrane for each quaternary amine group. The hydration number was calculated as the mole number of water per mole number of quaternary amine as given in eqn (2).2where MH2O is the molecular mass of water (18.015 g mol−1).
The swelling ratio of the AEMs in their hydroxide form was determined by measuring the dimensional changes in the dry and the wet membrane. The in-plane (S∥), through-plane (S⊥), and volume (SV) swelling ratios of the membranes in water were calculated using the following equation:3where x represents in-plane, through plane or volume swelling measurements and Xwet and Xdry are the length, thickness, or volume of swollen and dry membranes, respectively.
The in-plane (σ‖) hydroxide ion conductivity of the membranes was measured by using a four-point probe of BekkTech conductivity cells (BT-112). The membrane sample was taken out from 1 M KOH solution and washed with and soaked in degassed ultra-pure deionized water for 2 h to remove unbounded hydroxide ions. The resistance of the membranes was measured by using a DC conductivity testing instrument (Keithley 2400 sourcemeter) controlled by LabVIEW software. A potentiostat was set to apply a cyclic DC sweep to the inner probes and measure the resulting current. The slope of the data from linear fitting of current versus voltage measurement was used to calculate the resistance (R) and the hydroxide ion conductivity (σ) was calculated according to eqn (4):4where L is the distance in the direction of the ion flow between voltage measuring probes and A is the area of the membrane. Since the membrane swells during fuel cell operation, the hydrated thickness was used to calculate the conductivity and the resistivity of the membranes. The conductivity tests were performed at temperatures ranging from 30 to 80 °C under fully hydrated conditions. Temperature was ramped in 10 °C intervals followed by holding for 30 min to allow equilibration.
The accelerated alkaline stability of the membranes in the long-term was evaluated by immersing the samples in nitrogen saturated 1.0 M KOH at 80 °C. The IEC and ionic conductivity values of the AEMs were evaluated periodically under these strong alkaline degradation conditions over 4 weeks. Conductivity values at 80 °C were used to calculate the stability factor according to eqn (5):5
The alkaline solution was changed every week during the test. The percentage of initial conductivity and IEC retained over time was recorded. The stability factor (K) was defined as the ratio of conductivity at 80 °C after 12 days of immersion under strong alkaline conditions to the original value at the same temperature.
The efficiency of the selected membranes in reducing methanol crossover was evaluated using a dual chamber permeation apparatus as described elsewhere.47 1.0 M methanol was used as a feed and the methanol concentration in the receiver compartment was monitored as a function of time using a gas chromatography system with a FID detector (GC-FID, Agilent, 7820A) and DB-WAX column. Linear correlations between methanol concentration and diffusion time (t) were established and the permeability of methanol (P) was calculated from the slope of the plot between the CR and t with the following equation:6where C0 and t0 are the initial concentration of methanol in the compartment in the left side of the membrane and the time lag, VR is the diffusion reservoir volume, and A and L are the area and thickness of the membrane. The selectivity (S) of transport was calculated as a ratio of anion conductivity to methanol permeability.
Catalyst ink was prepared by adding the Pt/C electrocatalyst (40%, Johnson Matthey Co.) and 9 wt% of fluorinated poly(DADMAC) or QAPS ionomer solution to an appropriate solvent followed by ultrasonic treatment for 1 h. A catalyst-coated substrate was prepared by spraying the catalyst onto a surface of Toray TGPH-030 carbon paper using an airbrush (Badger 150). The weight percentage of the catalyst was controlled to be around 0.5 mg cm−2 for both anode and cathode sides. MEAs with an active area of 1 cm2 was prepared by hot pressing and tested with PEMFC hardware (850e, Scribner Associates Co.). A H2–O2 fuel cell test was performed at 80 °C by feeding 90% humidified H2 and O2 at a flow rate of 100 mL min−1 to the anode and 200 mL min−1 to the cathode.
2.3.Synthesis and AEM fabrication
2.3.1Preparation of PVBC grafted nanofibers
Nylon-66-g-PVBC and syn-PP-g-PVBC were synthesized by radiation-induced emulsion graft copolymerization. Nanofibrous sheets of nylon-66 and syn-PP, in vacuum sealed polyethylene bags, were irradiated using an electron beam accelerator (EPS 3000) to a total dose of 300 kGy and 35kGy (voltage of 2 MeV and current of 10 mA), respectively. Typically, a mixture of 5 wt% of VBC and 0.5 wt% of Tween-20 in DI water was prepared and the formed emulsion was homogenized for 1 h at room temperature and flushed using N2 gas for 30 min. The emulsion was transferred into an evacuated glass ampoule in which the irradiated nanofibrous sheet was kept and the ampoule was sealed and heated in a water bath at 50 °C for 10 h. Finally, the sample was removed, immersed in DI water at 70 °C for 8 h and repeatedly washed with methanol and toluene before drying under vacuum. The degree of grafting (dg) was determined by a gravimetric method according to the following equation:7where Ws and Wg are the weights of the original nanofibrous substrates and PVBC grafted nanofibers, respectively.
2.3.2Crosslinking of PVBC grafted electrospun nanofibers
Grafted side chains of PVBC were crosslinked with ODA. To ensure the complete reaction of both active sites of the diamine crosslinker, the following two-step procedure was used. Initially, sheets of PVBC grafted nanofibers (0.5 g) were immersed in a 5% solution of ODA for a duration of 5 to 90 min at 50 °C. The mats were removed from the diamine solution and thoroughly washed with DI water. In the second step, the mats were transferred into a new flask containing DI water and refluxed for 5 h. Finally, the samples were washed thoroughly with DI water and dried at 80 °C in a vacuum oven for 24 h. The degree of crosslinking (cd) was calculated after quaternization from the theoretical IEC value of an original membrane and the IEC value of the crosslinked one according to eqn (8). The observed IEC decrease was attributed to the diamine crosslinker.8where n.c refers to the non-crosslinked fiber and c refers to the crosslinked fiber.
2.3.3Converting nanofibrous sheets into dense membranes
The porosity of nanofibrous sheets was reduced and dense membranes were prepared upon a two-step sequence of tetrahydrofuran vapor exposure for 1 h followed by compacting. Initially, the crosslinked and non-crosslinked PVBC grafted fibers were swelled upon tetrahydrofuran vapor exposure which allows the polymer to fill the void space between fibers. Dense membranes were prepared by mechanical compression between two ETFE sheets at 87 °C with a pressure of 1700 psi for 25 seconds for four repeated times (the samples were rotated 90° three times to ensure a uniform compression).
2.3.4Quaternization and alkalization
Quaternization of the dense grafted nanofibrous samples was carried out by immersing the grafted membranes in 50% (v/v) trimethylamine at room temperature for 72 h. After completion of the reaction, the membranes were removed, washed with DI water and methanol to remove excess amine and then dried under vacuum at 80 °C overnight. Then, the membranes were treated with degassed 1 M KOH at room temperature for 48 h to exchange the chloride ions with hydroxide ions. This process was repeated to ensure a complete replacement. The membranes were washed with DI water thoroughly to remove residual KOH and stored therein prior to use.
