2Experimental
2.1Materials
Activated carbon (YP-80F) used in this study was purchased from Kuraray Chemical Co., Japan. A conducting carbon filler was procured from Alfa Aesar. Kynar®PVDF (polyvinylidene fluoride) was used as a binder and this was procured from Global Nanotech. N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP), 2-hydroxy-2-methylpropiophenone (HMPP) and propylene carbonate (PC) were purchased from Aldrich Chemicals. The monomers, 2-hydroxy-3-phenoxy propyl acrylate (HPA) (MW: 222.24 g) and methyl methacrylate (MMA) (MW: 100.121 g), were also purchased from Aldrich Chemicals. A polypropylene membrane purchased from Celgard was used as the separator. Grafoil®, used as the current collector, was procured from GrafTech. The UV chamber used contained four fluorescent lamps (Model: OSRAM Blue UVA/Colour 78).
2.2Preparation of the electrode
A slurry of the activated carbon, conducting carbon and Kynar® PVDF binder was made by mixing them in a weight ratio of 80 : 15 : 5 in NMP, followed by stirring the slurry for about 6 h. It was then probe sonicated for half an hour and a bar coater was used for coating the slurry over the Grafoil sheet. The Grafoil sheet coated with the electrode material was dried for about 12 h at a temperature of 80 °C in an oven followed by hot pressing at the same temperature for 30 min. It was subsequently dried overnight at about 180 °C in an oven.
2.3In situ preparation of the GPEs
A series of PHPA based GPEs were prepared and were designated with the general representation as H-P-L-xM-y%, where ‘x’ stands for the molarity of LiClO4 and ‘y’ denotes the volume percentage of the liquid electrolyte in the GPE. In a typical synthesis, 80% (v/v) of 3 M LiClO4 in PC was uniformly mixed with HPA and a desired amount of UV initiator (HMPP) is added. Disc shaped GPE films and cylindrical shaped GPEs were prepared by UV curing (21 minutes of exposure) for performing ionic conductivity measurements and mechanical characterisation, respectively. To study the role of LiClO4, the gel polymer was also prepared without incorporating the LiClO4 salt and the corresponding samples were represented as H-P-y%.
In order to understand the role of the functional groups present in the monomer in effecting the in situ GPE generation, another vinyl monomer, MMA, was also used to prepare the GPE and the properties are compared with those of the HPA based GPEs. The procedure used to prepare the MMA based GPE was the same as it was adopted in the case of the HPA based GPEs. The obtained GPEs were represented as M-P-L-xM-y% in the presence of LiClO4 and M-P-y% in the absence of LiClO4. In this case also, ‘x’ stands for the molarity of LiClO4 and ‘y’ denotes the volume percentage of the liquid electrolyte in GPEs.
2.4Preparation of the PMMA based quasi-solid-state GPE
For an effective comparison of the present system with the conventional quasi-solid-state GPE, a solution composed of 3.0 M LiClO4 and 20% (w/w) PMMA in PC was prepared by adding 1.6 g (20 wt%) of PMMA to 5 mL of 3.0 M LiClO4 in dry PC followed by vigorous stirring at 115 °C. Subsequently, the mixture was allowed to cool slowly to room temperature to obtain a highly viscous GPE solution.
2.5Device fabrication
The supercapacitor device fabricated using the in situ prepared H-P-L-xM-80% GPE is hereafter termed as H-P-L-xM-S-z, where ‘S’ stands for the solid device and ‘z’ stands for the electrode mass loading. In a typical device fabrication strategy, about 125–150 μl of the respective pre-polymerised solution (electrolyte-monomer-initiator mixture before polymerisation) was applied uniformly on the surface of a 4 cm2 electrode and the specimen was kept in a desiccator under vacuum for 2 h and subsequently cured under UV light for 46 min. Two such electrodes with the in situ generated GPE were used for the supercapacitor device fabrication by means of a sandwich-model followed by perfect sealing with an adhesive tape. The requirement for a separator in the system was also eliminated. The system was then kept for 2 days in a desiccator for the effective joining of the electrodes by the in situ formed polymer layer. All the experiments were done under sealed conditions to avoid any undesirable effects. Hence the formed devices with an electrode mass loading of 3 mg cm−2 and 3.8 mg cm−2 are represented as H-P-L-xM-S-3.0 and H-P-L-xM-S-3.8, respectively. The digits ‘3.0’ and ‘3.8’ represent the respective electrode mass loadings of the devices.
For the comparison purpose, a quasi-solid supercapacitor device was fabricated using the conventional device fabrication strategy by using the PMMA-PC-LiClO4 gel electrolyte solution. In a typical procedure, the two electrodes (mass loading = 3.8 mg cm−2, active area = 4 cm2) were directly soaked in the highly viscous PMMA-PC-LiClO4 gel electrolyte solution and the excess solvent was slowly evaporated at 100 °C for 4 h in a vacuum oven to get a polymer electrolyte film on the electrodes. These electrodes were then sandwiched by keeping a separator in between and sealed using adhesive tape to make the final device. Henceforth, the device thus formed is termed as PMMA-PC-L-S-3.8, where ‘S’ stands for the solid device and ‘3.8’ stands for the electrode mass loading of the device.
In order to demonstrate the scalability of the in situ strategy, larger area devices (16 cm2) with two different electrode mass loadings of 2.5 and 4.0 mg cm−2 were also prepared. The in situ generated H-P-L-3M-80% GPE was employed for this purpose as it was found to exhibit desired mechanical stability as well as electrochemical performance when used in the device. The amount of pre-polymerised solution used was about 500–600 μl. The devices with a mass loading of 2.5 and 4.0 mg cm−2 are represented as H-P-L-3M-S-2.5 and H-P-L-3M-S-4.0, respectively, where the digits ‘2.5’ and ‘4.0’ represent the respective mass loading of the scaled up devices.
Several other devices were also made for comparison purposes and the detailed experimental procedures are explained in the ESI.
2.6Materials characterisation
The structure and morphology of YP-80F were analysed with the help of a Hitachi S-4200 field emission scanning electron microscope (FE-SEM). A Zeiss Ultra Plus scanning electron microscope coupled with an energy dispersive X-ray (EDX) spectrometer (OXFORD Instruments, X-Max) was used for cross-sectional FE-SEM imaging and EDX mapping of the device. The specific surface area (SSA) of the material was determined by the Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) method at 77 K using a Quantachrome Quadrasorb automatic volumetric instrument. Before the N2 gas adsorption–desorption measurements, activation of the sample was done at 100 °C (for 36 h) under ultrahigh vacuum (10−8 mbar). Infrared spectra were recorded using a Bruker FT-IR (ATR mode) spectrophotometer in the range of 4000–600 cm−1. 13C-NMR spectra were recorded on a Bruker-AVANCE 200 MHz spectrometer.
2.7Electrochemical characterization of GPEs and the devices
Electrochemical evaluations were carried out using a BioLogic SP-300 Potentio-Galvanostat. In the device, the uncoated space of the Grafoil sheet was used for providing electrical connection. Cyclic voltammetry (CV) measurements were taken at different scan rates from 50 to 500 mV s−1 by fixing a potential window in the range of 0 to 2.0 V. Charge–discharge measurements were carried out at different current densities from 2 to 20 mA cm−2. Cycling stability was monitored by using charge–discharge experiments at a current density of 10 mA cm−2 for many thousands of cycles. Further details on the electrochemical measurements are given in the ESI including the equations used for calculating various performance assessment parameters. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopic (EIS) investigation was performed from 106 to 0.01 Hz frequency against the open circuit potential with a sinus amplitude of 10 mV (Vrms = 7.07 mV). The conductivity of the GPE films was measured by keeping them between two stainless steel discs and connecting the terminals through crocodile clips. The whole cell assembly was kept in an Espec environmental test chamber to control the temperature. The x-intercept of the Nyquist plot is taken as the bulk resistance of the membrane and the conductivity can be measured using eqn (4) and (5) as given in the ESI.
2.8Mechanical characterisation of PHPA, H-P-80% and GPEs
A dynamic mechanical analyzer (DMA) (RSA III, TA Instruments USA) equipped with TA Orchestrator software (version 7.2.0.4) was used for uni-axial tensile measurements (static mode) and dynamic compression measurements (dynamic mode) of the H-P-L-xM-y% GPEs. Uni-axial unconfined compression and cyclic compression measurements were performed with cylindrical H-P-L-3M-80% and H-P-80% gels of 15 mm diameter and 15 mm height using a single column table top electro-mechanical material testing station of 1 kN load cell capacity (model: Instron 5943, Instron Ltd., MA, USA), equipped with cylindrical compression platens of 50 mm diameter and Bluehill 3 software with a TestProfiler module for recording as well as analysing data. Further experimental details are presented in the ESI.
