2.Experimental section
2.1Materials
PTCDA (Mw = 392.32 g mol−1, r.r. &gt; 98%) was purchased from TCI and used without further purification. Ethanol and acetone (AR, Beijing Chemical Works) were used as received. The quartz substrates were purchased from Beijing Zhong Cheng Quartz Glass Co., Ltd. Water was purified using the Milli-Q purification system.
2.2Film preparation methods
The red reactant was placed in a quartz bullet and put in the middle of a quartz tube (60 mm diameter) connected to a vacuum system (∼450 Pa). It was then heated up at a rate of 2 °C min−1 to the target temperature and was maintained at that temperature for 3 hours (as shown in the schematic diagram in Fig. 1). A clean quartz substrate (20 mm × 30 mm) was washed with doubly distilled water, ethanol and acetone successively, and was placed next to the bullet along the direction of flow. The whole process was carried out under Ar with a gas flow rate of 20 mL min−1, as controlled by a quality flow meter. After naturally cooling, PPN thin films were obtained as uniform smooth films covering the surfaces of the substrates with a shiny metallic lustre.
(a) Schematic diagram of the setup for the pyrolysis of PTCDA. (b) Proposed reaction scheme for the pyrolytic process.1
2.3Measurement and characterisation
Seebeck coefficients were measured under vacuum below 10 m Torr using the SB-100 Seebeck Measurement System (MMR Tech.) and the temperature gradient was built along the length direction of the samples using temperature-variable Dewar (MMR Tech.). Sample films on quartz substrates were cut into pieces (2 mm × 5 mm). They were mounted on measuring boards and fixed with silver conductive paint (SCP03B, Electrolube). Electrical conductivity was measured in a typical four-probe manner using a Keithley 2002 multimeter and the temperature was controlled using a TPS refrigerator and tested by a thermocouple. Striped patterns (1 mm interval) of gold electrodes (with thicknesses of 30 nm) were thermally evaporated onto the upper surface of the samples films.
Ultraviolet-visible-near-infrared (UV-vis-NIR) absorption spectra were measured with a Lambda 950 UV/vis/NIR spectrometer (PerkinElmer Inc.). IR spectra were investigated using a TENSOR-27 spectrometer (Bruker). Raman spectra were obtained with a LabRAM ARAMIS (HORIBA Jobin Yvon) spectrometer, using an excitation wavelength of 532 nm. The morphologies and thicknesses of the films were obtained on an atomic force microscope (AFM) (Nanoscope IV Digital Instruments, Bruker) in tapping mode and a scanning electron microscope (SEM) S-4800 (Hitachi). Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and SAED measurements were carried out on a JEM-2100F (JEOL), with the samples loaded on amorphous carbon-coated TEM grids. θ/θ X-ray measurements were performed on an Empyrean (PaNalytical) X-ray diffractometer with Cu Kα radiation.
X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy (XPS) and Ultraviolet Photoelectron Spectroscopy (UPS) were also employed, using an AXIS Ultra-DLD ultrahigh vacuum photoemission spectroscopy system (Kratos Co.). A monochromatic aluminium Kα source (1486.6 eV) and a He I source (21.22 eV) were used for XPS and UPS, respectively. All characterisations were performed under a base pressure of better than 3 × 10−9 Torr. A negative substrate bias voltage of 9 V was implemented during the UPS measurements.
