Conclusions
We have shown that, based on the antiperovskite structure of Li3OA (A = halogen), a stable and lightweight superionic conductor Li3O(BH4) can be prepared by replacing halogens “A” with superhalogen BH4−. The material exhibits a Li+ conductivity of the order of 10−4 S cm−1 at room temperature, a low activation energy of 0.3 eV, a very large band gap of about 7 eV, high melting temperature and favorable mechanical properties. It is also shown that, in a phase formed by mixing halogens and superhalogens in equal proportions, the Li+-ion conductivity of Li3OCl0.5(BH4)0.5 at room temperature can be improved significantly to over 10−3 S cm−1. The conduction mechanism of the new superionic conductor relies on the translation and rotation of the BH4− superhalogen upon thermal excitation, generating different orientational symmetries of the BH4− tetrahedra. This results in spatial and temporal variation of the potential surface felt by the Li+ ions, enhancing their migration inside the material. Such a mechanism may also explain the observed superionic conductivity in the recently reported lithium and sodium salts that contain BH4− as well as large cage-like anions B12H122− and CB11H12−.18,38
This study adds to the power of the superhalogen BH4− in the design of yet another energy material – the solid electrolytes in Li-ion batteries. We note that BH4− has been used to prepare metal salts for hydrogen storage,39 to replace halogens to synthesize new perovskite crystals,19 to design new inorganic–organic hybrid perovskites for solar cells16,17 and to prepare new two-dimensional hybrid perovskites for LED applications.20 With BH4−, new physical and chemical degrees of freedom have been introduced into the superionic conductor family of Li3OA (A = halogen). It will be interesting to study in the future the optimal ratio (x) of the mixed phase of Li3O(BH4)xAx (A = halogen; 0 &lt; x &lt; 1) that can exhibit the maximum superionic conductivity. Combined with other improvements in stability and mechanical properties discussed above, Li3O(BH4)xAx antiperovskites have the potential to be promising solid electrolytes. It would be interesting to extend the current study to antiperovskites containing sodium, such as Na3OA (A = BH4, NO3 and CN)34 and to prepare new antiperovskite superionic conductors by choosing other superhalogens that have appropriate sizes and internal charge distributions.
