Results and discussion
Although the visual appearance of the DMF-based co-crystalline electrolytes is that of “dry” crystals (Fig. 2), evidence of an amorphous (liquid or glass) phase comes from SEM, EIS, and DSC data. SEM images of the rounded edges of microcrystalline domains (Fig. 3) show that individual crystallites do not have well defined edges, but instead exhibit a liquid like surface that connects grains to one another. Upon excessive drying, whether under vacuum or under argon atmosphere, the liquid-like grain boundary evaporates, resulting in striations in the crystals and smaller crystallite grains with gaps between them (Fig. 3). This behaviour is consistent with observations using electrochemical impedance spectroscopy, which gives excellent conductivities14 for an organic lithium electrolyte in the realm of 10−4 S cm−1, while an overdried sample (i.e. held under vacuum or argon dried for 8 h) exhibited an order of magnitude decrease in conductivity (Fig. 4). Our previous work demonstrated that for a freshly prepared sample of LiCl·DMF, grain boundary resistance is negligible. This is consistent with a liquid salt/DMF electrolyte at the grain interface, which would be expected to be highly conductive (in the range of 10−3 S cm−1). However, upon loss of this liquid binding layer upon excessive drying, the grain boundary resistance becomes dominant, resulting in a drop in conductivity by an order of magnitude, from 1.6 × 10−4 to 1.3 × 10−5 S cm−1 (Fig. 4). Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) data for the co-crystals (Fig. S2) shows melt transitions that correspond with peaks at ∼−10, −20 and 20 °C, similar to those observed in the DSC trace of liquid solutions of LiCl in DMF (since the bulk DMF·LiCl decomposes before it melts, it shows no melt transitions). We therefore assign these signals in the solid material to the surface liquid phase based on comparison to measurements of concentrated DMF–LiCl solutions in the concentration range of 0.2 M to 5 M. While these concentrations are rather lower than the theoretical molarity of the one-to-one adduct (11.35 M, based on crystallographic density of 1.306 g mL−1),14 bulk solutions of increased molarity were not achievable due to solubility limits. Rather than exhibiting the normal colligative freezing point depression, these solutions, when frozen, instead form low melting solvate crystals, which have different powder XRD signatures than the 1/1 DMF·LiCl bulk co-crystal (Fig. S3). Although the structure of these crystals is currently unknown, they melt and recrystallize reproducibly, forming a liquid at temperatures &gt; −10 °C, similar to the liquid boundary phase of the bulk DMF·LiCl crystals.
Optical microscope image of crystals of LiCl·DMF.
Top: SEM of LiCl·DMF showing crystals with smooth liquid grain boundaries. Bottom: LiCl·DMF after drying in argon overnight showing gaps between crystal grains from evaporation of liquid DMF interface.
Top: Impedance spectra of fresh LiCl·DMF (black) and overdried (8 h) LiCl·DMF (red). Fitting to equivalent circuit gives conductivities of 1.6 × 10−4 S cm−1 for fresh LiCl·DMF and 1.3 × 10−5 S cm−1. Frequency range 10–100 kHz. Bottom: Expanded view of fresh LiCl·DMF.
Unlike NaClO4·(DMF)3 (which melts and recrystallizes), cocrystals of DMF·LiCl decompose at about 60 °C, resulting in DMF evaporation and leaving LiCl salt behind based on XRD. If the crystals are overdried, the liquid binding layer is lost (Fig. 3), and the measured conductivity drops from 1.6 × 10−4 S cm−1 to 1.3 × 10−5 S cm−1 (Fig. 4) due to the increased grain boundary resistance. While these behaviours are non-ideal for practical electrolytes, they offer the opportunity to investigate observed bulk properties at the molecular level using molecular dynamics simulations, which may be applied to other members of this new materials class.
In constructing molecular dynamics models of bulk and surface behaviours of DMF·LiCl, system S (for “solid”) describes a periodic solid of 5 × 5 × 5 unit cells, and is used to calculate thermal and structural properties of LiCl·DMF co-crystals in their bulk phase. MD simulations at 100 K show a resemblance of the supercell to the experimentally determined X-ray crystal structure (see Fig. 5). The calculated density of the bulk (1.209 g mL−1) at 100 K is lower by ∼7% compared to experiment (1.306 g mL−1).14 Since the co-crystals of the material decompose to give LiCl(s) instead of vaporizing, it is not possible to compare the calculated enthalpies of vaporization ΔHvap with experiment. However, we have compared the results for liquid DMF with previous experimental and theoretical studies,32 for which the calculated ΔHvap differ by ∼6%. The temperature-dependent variation in density and ΔHvap of LiCl·DMF is shown in Fig. S1. In this system, melting and decomposition phenomena appear to be surface phenomena, and are not modelled by the bulk behavior of system S; these properties will be discussed in a subsequent section.
Experimental structure of a 5 × 5 × 5 array of unit cells from XRD and MD snapshots of LiCl·DMF in system S at different temperatures after equilibration. Irregularities at the unit cell boundaries are artefacts of the non-periodic display of the visualization. Yellow: DMF, purple: Li, green: Cl.
The perturbations in Li+ and Cl− ionic frameworks increase significantly above room temperature. At 380 K, a visual observation shows that the fluctuations in structure overwhelm the ionic and ion-dipole framework completely and the lattice collapses (see Fig. 5). The simulations show a decomposition temperature in the range observed experimentally in the thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) experiments, and visually observed in a melting point apparatus (starts at 350 K and is complete by 420 K).
While system S predicts bulk behaviour, results from SEM (Fig. 3) suggest that evaporation of the liquid grain boundaries triggers the start of electrolyte failure and decomposition: a surface phenomenon. In order to model this, we performed MD simulations for system V (for vacuum): a nanocrystal of DMF·LiCl where the simulation box is 27 times larger and models the vacuum-co-crystal interface at the crystal edges. These simulations permit molecules on the surface of the solid co-crystal to leave the bulk and initiate melting or evaporation. At 100 K, the slab of LiCl·DMF in this large box behaves like a solid and the molecules at the surface and in the bulk behave almost identically (see Fig. 6). However with an increase in temperature the DMF molecules and ions on the surface show different characteristics compared to the bulk. Between 220 K and 300 K, a structure consisting of an inner solid bulk inside an outer liquid layer is observed. This models the observed structural anomaly of the material and matches well to the experimental description of a bulk solid in equilibrium with a boundary liquid (see Fig. 6 and Movie, ESI). It is in remarkable agreement with the previously reported conductivity behaviour, where it was shown that at ∼210 K, approximately the melt temperature of DMF, the conductivity of DMF·LiCl dropped off abruptly (and was too low to measure);14 the conductivity of a 1 M LiCl solution in DMF also decreased abruptly at this temperature.
Snapshots of LiCl·DMF in system V at different temperatures after equilibration.
The presence of a vacuum on each side of system V provides free space to the ionic framework and DMF molecules at the surface; due to the lack of lattice stabilization by favourable intermolecular/interionic contacts in vacuum, high fluctuations are observed at the surface. At higher temperatures (∼360 K), a first molecule of DMF migrates from the surface to the vacuum region, leaving its own ion pair (Li+ and Cl−) at the surface. This behaviour can be considered as the onset of the evaporation of the liquid boundary layer and ultimately, the decomposition of this material. The result is consistent with the comparative morphology of fresh vs. dried crystals from SEM (Fig. 3), and with observation from powder X-ray diffraction that thermal decomposition leads to loss of DMF, but not of LiCl, since in the powder XRD pattern of decomposed solid, diffraction peaks are seen for both DMF·LiCl and cubic LiCl salt (Fig. 7).
Powder pattern of decomposed LiCl·DMF (blue) showing a mixture of LiCl·DMF peaks (orange: calculated powder pattern from crystal structure of LiCl·DMF) and cubic LiCl peaks marked with *.
System S represents an infinite array of unit cells and hence it is used to calculate a number of useful structural parameters for the bulk phase. The Radial Distribution Functions (RDF) between Li+ and Cl− atoms (Fig. 8) shows a first coordination sphere around Li+ with a first maximum at 0.238 nm at 100 K, corresponding to the coordinating Cl atoms. To observe the effect of temperature on Li+···Cl− framework fluctuations, RDFs were calculated at all temperatures. The structure shows smooth and continuous secondary solvation shells at higher temperatures which indicate vanishing lattice boundaries with increase in temperature. In the primary solvation shells, except for a slight rightward shift of the peak maxima and a slight decrease in intensity, no significant signature of a singularity associated with a phase transformation was observed until 350 K. However at 380 K, not only is an increase in intensity of RDF observed but also the peak maxima are shorter by 0.01 nm, compared to 350 K, which indicates stronger Li+ Cl− interactions during decomposition, consistent with the experimentally observed formation of LiCl(s) upon decomposition based upon XRD data (Fig. 7).
Site–site radial distribution functions (RDF) between Li+ and Cl− in the system S; inset shows peak of the primary solvation shell.
Since the solid state structure of the co-crystal largely depends on the framework formed with O⋯Li+···Cl− atoms, Combined Distribution Functions (CDFs) were calculated at different temperatures to observe the cumulative change in O⋯Li+ and Li+···Cl− radial distributions (Fig. 9). The CDF at 100 K shows a very ordered secondary solvation structure of both site–site interactions. There are at least three and two distinct shells of Li+ around the O and Cl− sites respectively. However at room temperature, secondary shells show a continuous CDF, though signatures of higher probability on this distribution show the ordered structure of the system in bulk. The CDF at 350 K shows almost vanishing structures of both sites (O and Cl−) with respect to the Li+ ion, which fades further with increasing temperature (T = 380 K, 400 K and 420 K).
Combined distribution functions of Li–O vs. Li–Cl radial distributions in system S.
To understand the relationship between decomposition temperature and structure, we calculated the average distance between Li+ and Cl− ions present on the same LiCl·DMF residue (referred to as “intra-residue”) plotted vs. time for each temperature (see Fig. 10a) using system S. The distances show marginal increases at lower temperatures (100–220 K), moderate increases at room temperature and an almost linear increase at T ≥ 350 K. To further confirm our findings, we performed simulated annealing (from 100 K to 500 K) with continuous jumps of 20 K for 500 ps each (for a total time of 10.5 ns) for system S. The intra-residue average Li+–Cl− distance, rintra(Li+···Cl−)vs. time/temperature plot (blue colored line in Fig. 10b) shows a sudden increase in distance around 380 K.
rintra(Li+···Cl−)vs. (a) time in system S and (b) temperature in systems S and V (rintra(Li+···Cl−) from XRD is 0.233 nm). Variations at low temperatures are shown as insets.
To compare dynamical behavior of the surface vs. bulk, system V was used, examining samples of 100 ion pairs each on the surface and bulk. Fig. 10b shows a comparison between the average distances of ions in bulk (red) vs. surface (black) from system V and system S (blue) with time/temperature. The average inter-ionic rintra(Li+···Cl−) distance at low temperatures is similar in the bulk and on the surface. However, as the temperature increases and approaches 300 K, a difference in average distance between the surface and bulk becomes pronounced, which keeps increasing and differs drastically around the region of decomposition. Further, the trends for the bulk in system V are similar to the trends for system S, for which there is no removal of DMF. In the very low temperature regime (100–150 K), rintra(Li+···Cl−) is similar in the bulk and on the surface. Above 200 K, rintra(Li+···Cl−) is larger on the surface compared to the bulk. At T &gt; 350 K, the difference in distances between bulk and surface becomes much larger. This provides a quantitative justification for the material behavior, which is liquid-like at the surface but behaves as a solid in the bulk. Unlike with the bulk system, we were unable to calculate a density of the liquid region due to an apparent gradient in the simulated density near the edge of the nanocrystal (Fig. S6). Further, the density in the interfacial regions is also not uniform in all directions of the simulation box. However, a density distribution can be obtained by using very fine grids perpendicular to the X, Y and Z directions of the simulation box. The density distribution in system V (T = 298 K) is shown in Fig. S6 of the ESI.
Dynamics
Since the co-crystals of LiCl·DMF show better experimental temperature dependent conductivity compared to other organic solids,14 Mean Square Displacements (MSDs) were calculated to estimate ion mobility of the material using Nernst–Einstein's equation.33 At T &lt; 200 K, due to the very slow mobility of ions a linear regime for the applicability of Nernst–Einstein's equation was not observed and hence the conductivities are not calculable from MD. In analogy, the conductivities were also not experimentally measurable below this temperature.14 However at T &gt; 200 K a linear regime could be obtained for the MSD vs. time plot, ionic conductivity (σ) of the co-crystals were calculated at several temperatures. The plot of log σ vs. T shows two jumps between 250–300 K and T ∼ 350 K. These jumps can be correlated to the partial melting of the lattice layers and the initial stages of decomposition respectively. While the values of log σ (Fig. 11) are an order of magnitude too high at 298 K, the experimentally observed conductivity of 10−4 S cm−1 is predicted at 250 K, a temperature only about 17% different from room temperature. The differences in absolute value between experimental and simulated conductivities are likely due to the exclusion of covalent character in modelled interactions among O⋯Li⋯Cl networks in the force field. For example, the conductivities reported by Deng et al.34 on two solid lithium based electrolytes were overestimated by at least an order of magnitude. The values of conductivities obtained from the MD simulations thus provide a qualitative picture and are typical for ab initio MD simulations on other solid electrolytes.35
log of ionic conductivity vs. T in system S.
To understand the dynamics of ions in the bulk and on the surface, system V is used to calculate MSD of Li+ and Cl− ions at fixed temperatures for a sample of 200 ions (100 Li+ and 100 Cl−) each in the bulk and on the surface. The MSDs (Fig. 12) show that Li+ and Cl− ions on the surface are roughly an order of magnitude more mobile compared to bulk at room temperature. Ionic conductivities in these liquid-like grain boundaries should indeed be high, based on the measured ionic conductivities of 1 M solutions of LiCl in DMF, which are approximately two orders of magnitude greater than bulk conductivities of the solid LiCl·DMF co-crystals, and diverge further at lower temperatures. Both the experimental conductivity measurements (solid LiCl·DMF and liquid LiCl–DMF solutions) and the MD treatment of system V (which considers both the solid bulk and the liquid-like boundary) are consistent with the experimental observation that the liquid-like grain boundary contributes negligible resistance to an assembly of pressed crystals.
Mean Square Displacement (MSD) vs. time of Li+ and Cl− ions in systems V on surface and in bulk at T = 298 K. Similar trends of higher mobility at the surface are found at other temperatures (see ESI).
Interaction energetics
The contribution from various interactions in the DMF·LiCl co-crystals are essential to understanding the stability of the systems and the mobilities of their components. These relationships are examined here in two ways: (1) by non-bonded potentials or Interaction Energies (IEnb) derived from MD simulations on a large assembly, and by more computationally rigorous density functional theoretical (DFT) calculations on smaller assemblies. Due to the charge dense nature of Li+ and its corresponding characterization as a “hard” Lewis acid, we classify interactions in this system with lithium as hard (Li+⋯DMF and Li+⋯Cl−) and those not involving lithium as soft interactions (DMF⋯Cl− and DMF–DMF). For the hard interactions in the MD simulations (Fig. 13a), IEnb of Li+⋯DMF is ∼−33 kcal mol−1 at 100 K which decreases by −1 kcal mol−1 up to 380 K. As expected, due to stronger electrostatic interactions, the IEnb of Li+⋯Cl− is more negative (∼−47 kcal mol−1 at 100 K), which reduces slightly with increasing temperature (∼−45 kcal mol−1 at 380 K). At the point of transition (T ∼ 380 K), while the IEnb of Li+⋯DMF drops significantly and saturates to ∼−21 kcal mol−1 (between 400–500 K), the Li+⋯Cl− interactions become stronger at T &gt; 380 K (by ∼−5 kcal mol−1). Hence, both types of hard interactions show opposite trends at the transition point. This suggests that the transition point is actually the start of lattice decomposition, and results in aggregation of LiCl(s) and expulsion of DMF from the lattice, as is observed experimentally by powder XRD analysis of the product (Fig. 7).
Non-bonded interaction energies vs. T in system S for (a) hard and (b) soft interactions.
The soft DMF⋯Cl− interactions (Fig. 13b) show an IEnb = −1.7 kcal mol−1 from 100–380 K which reduces beyond the transition point (IEnb ∼ 0 kcal mol−1 at 400 K). The DMF–DMF interactions (IEnb ∼ −9.4 kcal mol−1 at 100 K) reduce slightly to −8.4 kcal mol−1 at T = 380 K. After the transition point, these interactions show a marginal increase to IEnb ∼ −9.0 kcal mol−1, promoting self-aggregation of DMF with itself concomitant with expulsion from the LiCl lattice. For all interactions, IEnb attains saturation at T &gt; 420 K, which can be considered as the temperature of complete decomposition of the co-crystals. Although, the energy scales of hard and soft interactions differ by an order of magnitude, a complex interplay of various interactions is responsible for lattice stability and decomposition. The stabilization of Li+Cl− interactions beyond the transition point can be seen by a further lowering of ΔHvap by ∼5 kcal mol−1 energy, which can cause the vaporization of some DMF molecules from the co-crystal (for DMF, ΔHvap = 10–11 kcal mol−1).36 This behaviour is observed experimentally when DMF·LiCl thermally decomposes, resulting in boiling off of DMF, leaving LiCl behind as a solid. The vaporization of DMF molecules is shown in the ESI Movie for system V. An examination of ionic charge densities (see ESI) supports the lattice decomposition temperature predicted by structure and dynamics.
To examine the decomposition behaviours with increased computational rigor, we calculated intra-crystal interaction energies of the co-crystal and dimerization and tetramerization energies from DFT using B3LYP functional and 6-311++G(d,p) basis set. The interaction energies are calculated using Fragment Counterpoise (fCP)37 and rigorous fCP (rig-fCP)38 methods (Table 1) which provide more accurate energies with correction for basis set superposition error39 and fragment relaxations. The monomers and dimers are expected to be more abundant on the liquid-like surface while larger aggregates (modelled here by tetramers) are more likely to be found in the bulk. The structures of monomers, dimers, optimized dimer, and optimized tetramers are analogous to experimentally observed connectivity and are illustrated in Fig. 14 with detailed structural parameters provided in the ESI. All optimized geometries are minimum energy structures confirmed by frequency calculations. The M1 and M2 represent optimized DMF·LiCl monomer in the form of DMF·Li+⋯Cl− and DMF⋯LiCl fragments respectively (see Fig. 14). As seen from Table 1, the interaction energy of the DMF·Li+⋯Cl− (in M1) is of the order of bond dissociation energy (&gt;100 kcal mol−1), and hence it is difficult to observe such pair dissociations from MD simulations. However, DMF⋯LiCl interactions in M2 are significantly lower (∼−28 kcal mol−1) in energy. Such configurations can facilitate the decomposition of the co-crystal to form DMF and LiCl, as observed experimentally at the decomposition temperature. The single point structures D1 and D2 have non-planar Cl atoms associated to O2Li2 bridges, while optimized geometries of D3 and D4 (Fig. 14) contain O2Li2Cl2 atoms in the same plane. Though there are structural differences in single point and optimized structures of the dimer, the dimerization energies observed from single point (D1, D2) and optimized geometry (D3, D4) are similar.
Interaction energies of fragments, dimers and tetramers of DMF·LiCl from DFT calculations
StructuresInteractionsEnergy (kcal mol−1)rig-fCPFrom single point energy of XRD crystal structure.From optimized geometry.rig-fCP not used, due to no optimization of geometry, IE is calculated using fCP method (see ESI). Configurations and definitions of normal and invert keywords are provided in the ESI. See ESI for computation of interaction energies using rig-fCP and fCP methods.Monomer relaxations (all opt)M1DMF·Li+⋯Cl−−123.96M2DMF⋯LiCl−27.32 (DMF·LiCl)2dimerizationD1Normal (sp)−24.82D2Invert (sp)−24.14D3Normal (opt)−23.73D4Invert (opt)−23.94 (DMF·LiCl)4tetramerization from monomer (all opt)T1Li2Cl2 junction normal−69.86T2Li2Cl2 junction invert−84.49T3O2Li2 junction normal−54.42T4O2Li2 junction invert−54.26 (DMF·LiCl)4tetramerization from dimer (opt)T5Li2Cl2 junction−28.46Single point (D1 and D2) and optimized geometries (all other) of structures with the color clouds indicating dissociating fragments for determination of interaction energies. A complete list of IE values are given in Table S2 with colored text corresponding to the same-colored fragment in each illustrated system. Wavy lines are used to show the cleavage points for dissociating fragments.
The dimerization energies are slightly lower compared to the M2 interaction energy which alludes to the higher possibility of dimer dissociation compared to M2 fragment dissociation.
The tetramerization energies (4 M → T1, T2, T3, or T4) are &gt;50 kcal mol−1 for all possible configurations. Here, T1 (Fig. 13, Table 1) and T2 (Table 1, Fig. S7) are tetramers of hard Li⋯Cl multi-bridges, and T3 and T4 (Table 1, Fig. 14) are comparatively weaker tetramers containing softer O⋯Li multi-bridges. The IEs show that decomposition of T1, T2, T3 and T4 tetramers to the corresponding monomer is energetically unfavourable. The decomposition of T5 to monomer requires ∼50 kcal mol−1 as the path of the decomposition follows T5 (Table 1) → D(i) → M1 or M2. Though the calculated interaction energies are gas phase quantum chemistry calculations, it can be concluded that the low energy requirement for dimer to monomer dissociation and self-decomposition of monomer are more likely to be observed at grain boundaries, promoting ion mobility, while the higher energy requirement for dissociation of larger aggregates (more likely to be found in the interior) favours leaving the bulk structure intact. This is consistent with the experimentally observed liquidity and high conductivity at the grain boundaries, the decomposition of co-crystals before boiling, and evaporation of DMF molecules during decomposition. The interaction energies for the smaller units of DMF·LiCl (e.g. monomer and dimer) and the larger aggregates (tetramer) supports the preferential decomposition/dissociation of cocrystals on the surface over the bulk.
