Experimental
Fabrication of binary electrolytes
1-Ethyl-3-methylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate (EMIMBF4), purchased from Chengjie Chemical, Shanghai, China, had a purity &gt;99% and the content of water &lt;80 ppm. GBL (Aladdin) was of GC purity and its water content &lt;20 ppm. Mixing of EMIMBF4 and GBL was performed for 1 h in a glove box filled with Ar (H2O &lt; 0.1 ppm, O2 &lt; 0.1 ppm). The volume ratios of EMIMBF4 to GBL were 10 : 1, 2 : 1, 1 : 1, and 1 : 2 and marked as E10G1, E2G1, E1G1, and E1G2, respectively. GBL in E1G1 was also replaced by propylene carbonate (PC) marked as E1P1 without any other changes.
The information of electrode materials
The present mesoporous GNFs were prepared by the specially treated MgO substrate in a methane CVD process reported elsewhere.8 The carbon source was methane and the decomposition of methane in CVD process was at 900 °C over a microporous and mesoporous substrate of MgO in a quartz-tube reactor. After growth in CVD process, the product was a mixture of C–MgO. After cooling at ambient condition, the MgO in C–MgO was dissolved by HCl at 30 °C and washed with de-ionized water 5 times. After drying in a freeze drying apparatus at −25 °C and 10−1 Pa for 48 h, the as-obtained GNF had a surface area of 1274 m2 g−1 and an average pore size of 5.6 nm. The purity of GNF was about 99.1% (impurities are carbon encapsulated and unable to be dissolved by HCl). The sample was thin sheets with a size of 5–20 μm under SEM. The electrical conductivity of the GNF powder was about 30 S cm−1.
Fabrication of graphene electrode on Al foil (current collector) and the coin-type SCs
Current collector was an etched Al foil with a thickness of 20 μm. Binders were carboxymethyl cellulose sodium (CMC) and polymerized styrene butadiene rubber (SBR). In test of cycle life, the binder was replaced with PTFE and the conductive filler was Super P (SP). To obtain the symmetric electrodes, GNF, binders and SP with a weight ratio of 75 : 10 : 10 : 5 were mixed together in water for 24 h to form a homogeneous slurry. Then, after the slurry was uniformly pasted on Al foil, dried in an oven and compressed by a roller presser, the density of GNF sheet was approximately 1.58 mg cm−2 and it was 120 μm in thickness. The obtained graphene-Al foil was cut in the form of round disks with a diameter of 13 mm. The disks were dried under vacuum at 150 °C for 12 hours and then transferred into a glove box described above. Two disks with same mass loading were assembled with polypropylene (PP) membrane (20 μm in thickness) and filled with binary electrolytes above in 2025 type coin SCs.
Electrochemical measurements
The capacitance performance of coin SCs was aged for 6 h at a certain temperature and tested in a chamber by a VSP-300 (Bio-logic) workstation. The equivalent series resistance (ESR) and Nyquist plot was obtained by Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy (EIS) measurement at 0 V from 10 mHz to 100 kHz with an amplitude of 5 mV. ESR was considered to be equal to X-intercept of the Nyquist plot. Conductivity was carried out by the equation below:3where k was concerned with the coin, assuming invariant at different temperatures.
The specific capacitance of the electrode was calculated from the discharge curve in galvanostatic charge–discharge measurements by the formula below:4in which I was current density and Umax was the first and highest value among discharge progress (not equal to 4 V). The energy density and power density of SCs were calculated by these formulas below:56where Δt was the time of discharge.
