Conclusions
PPO was tethered with 8 different hetero-cycloaliphatic QA cations via pentyl spacer chains to study the effect of ring size, presence of additional heteroatom and methyl substitution pattern on the stability and performance of AEMs within a narrow IEC range. The results showed that the thermal stability decreased with increasing ring strain and methyl substitution, as well as the presence of an electron withdrawing O-heteroatom (morpholinium). Moreover, the alkaline stability was found to decrease with increased (7-membered) ring size, substitution in the 2-and 6-positions in the piperidinium ring, as well as the presence of the additional O-heteroatom. QA cations attached in benzylic positions on the PPO backbone showed the lowest stability in the study, and the spacer concept provided superior stability and conductivity. The quaternary piperidinium and quinuclidinium functionalized materials showed the best overall properties when comparing the different AEMs tethered with hetero-cycloaliphatic QAs on the basis of thermal and alkaline stability, and OH− conductivity. The quinuclidinium-based AEM displayed efficient ion cluster formation and reached the highest conductivity of the studied AEMs at a moderate water uptake, as well as the highest thermal stability. Moreover, this AEM showed no degradation in the alkaline stability test. Apparently, the bridged bicyclic configuration of this cation brings many advantages in the context of AEMs. The drawbacks of this QA cation are the toxicity and high price of the quinuclidine precursor. Thus, the quaternary piperidinium cation may still possess the most attractive combination of properties. Notably, AEMs tethered with the non-cyclic trimethylammonium cation performed very well with high conductivity and stability. The conditions used in the evaluation of the alkaline stability were not severe enough to cause degradation and show the difference between, e.g., the pyrrolidinium, piperidinium and trimethylammonium cations. In summary, the combined results provide a guide for the selection of QA groups and membrane materials to improve the lifetime and performance of alkaline electrochemical energy devices.
