Experimental
Materials
O,O′-Bis(2-aminopropyl)polypropylene glycol-block-polyethylene glycol-block-polypropylene glycol (Jeffamine ED-900, Mw = 900 g mol−1) was procured from Huntsman International LLC. Bisphenol-A diglycidyl ether (DGEBA) and the IL (EMImTFSI, as both the solvent and ion conductor) were purchased from Aldrich Chemical and used as received without further purification. The activated carbon powder used in this study was a mixture of 95 wt% activated mesophase pitch carbon (aMP carbon, Taiwan Carbon Technology AW1107, Taiwan) and 5 wt% multiwall carbon nanotubes (Aldrich Chemical). According to N2 adsorption analysis, the porosity of the aMP carbon consists of 63% microporosity and 37% mesoporosity and the surface area is 2700 m2 g−1, as determined using the Brunauer–Emmett–Teller method.
Preparation and characterization of the solid polymer electrolyte
The novel SPE-(PEO-A):IL was prepared through a simple one-step epoxy–amine reaction at a mild temperature (90 °C). Briefly, determined amounts of ED-900 and DGEBA were dissolved in EMImTFSI. The monomer ratio of ED-900 and DGEBA was consistently 1 : 2, whereas the amount of EMImTFSI varied and the mass ratio of EMImTFSI to the whole monomer fluctuated among 1, 1.5, 2, 2.5, 3, and 3.5 times. The solution was therefore denoted as SPE-(PEO-A):ILx, where x is the mass ratio of EMImTFSI. Subsequently, the clear homogenous solution was stirred using a mechanical stirrer for 1 h before being poured into a polypropylene Petri dish (PP dish). The solution was maintained in the dish at 90 °C for 6 h, during which polymerization between the epoxy and amine group occurred. Scheme S1 illustrates the detailed reaction mechanism: notably, processes (1) and (2) can occur simultaneously or occur sequentially depending on the system conditions.40,41 The resulting polymer electrolyte film was freestanding and dry, and thus easily peeled from the PP dish. The fabricated polymer electrolyte membrane is shown in Fig. 1(a) and was subjected to Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR), scanning electron microscopy (SEM), X-ray diffraction (XRD), thermogravimetric analysis (TGA), ionic conductivity, and electrochemical stability window (ESW) tests.
(a) Optical photograph of the SPE-(PEO-A):IL. SEM images of (b) the (PEO-A) polymer and (c) the SPE-(PEO-A):IL. (d) Fluorine elemental mapping of the SPE-(PEO-A):IL SEM image.
Specifically, the chemical structures of the synthesized cross-linked (PEO-A) polymer and SPE-(PEO-A):IL were analyzed using FTIR (Nicolet 6700, Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., USA). The crystalline phases of the polymer and SPE-(PEO-A):IL were revealed through XRD (Rigaku, Ultima IV, Japan) in an angle range (2θ) of 10–40°. The surface morphologies of the SPE-(PEO-A):IL membrane and the interface structure between the electrodes and SPE-(PEO-A):IL were observed using an SEM instrument (HitachiSU8010, Japan). The distribution of EMImTFSI in the (PEO-A) polymer matrix was determined from energy dispersive X-ray (EDX) spectra collected from the same SEM instrument. The thermal stability of the SPE-(PEO-A):IL was analyzed at temperatures of 100–750 °C (heating rate = 10 °C min−1) under a nitrogen atmosphere using TGA (Perkin Elmer TGA 7). The ionic conductivities of the SPE-(PEO-A):ILx and pure EMImTFSI at temperatures from 20 to 110 °C were examined through AC-impedance spectroscopy by sandwiching the sample between two stainless steel electrodes on an electrochemical analyzer (Zahner-Elektrik IM6e, Germany) where the voltage amplitude was 10 mV and the frequency varied from 1 Hz to 100 kHz. The ionic conductivity (σ) was calculated according to eqn (1):1where L (cm) is the thickness of the SPE-(PEO-A):IL membrane, Rb (Ω) is the bulk electrolyte resistance, and S (cm2) is the contact area between the electrolyte membrane and stainless steel electrodes.
Finally, the ESWs of the pure EMImTFSI and SPE-(PEO-A):IL were measured by applying linear sweep voltammetry with an electrochemical analyzer (CHI614B; CH Instruments Inc., USA) by sandwiching the polymer electrolyte membrane between two stainless steel electrodes in the potential window from 0 to 4.5 V at a sweep rate of 5 mV s−1.
Fabrication and electrochemical analysis of EDLCs
The composition of the electrode material for the EDLC was prepared by mixing 87 wt% of aMP carbon, 5 wt% of carbon black (Super P), and 8 wt% of poly(vinylidene fluoride) binder (PVdF, Mn = 534 000 g mol−1, Aldrich Chemical) in a mortar pestle. The homogeneous carbon mixture slurry was then coated onto an aluminum foil current collector with a doctor blade. The coated electrodes were then heated under vacuum at 80 °C. The average mass of the electrodes was approximately 1.5 mg cm−2.
It is noted that when fabricating the flexible EDLC device, the mixture of ED-900, DGEBA, and EMImTFSI was dropped onto the carbon-activated electrode surface, forming an SPE-(PEO-A):IL membrane directly on the surface of the electrodes. The thickness of the SPE layer between the two electrodes was controlled by the amount of solution dropped. For comparison, a liquid-state EDLC with the same electrodes, and using a cellulose separator and EMImTFSI as the liquid electrolyte, was also fabricated, and its electrochemical performance was evaluated. The liquid-state EDLC was placed in an encapsulation cell (Fig. 5).
The electrochemical behaviors of the EDLCs were determined using electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS), cyclic voltammetry (CV), and galvanostatic charge–discharge (GCD) tests on an electrochemical workstation (Zahner-ElektrikIM6e, Germany; Solartron Analytical, Model 1470E, United Kingdom) at room temperature. The EIS measurements were performed by applying an AC voltage with a potential amplitude of 5 mV in a frequency range of 0.01–100 kHz. The CV curves of the EDLCs were recorded at various scan rates (10–200 mV s−1) within a potential window of 0–3 V. The GCD tests were recorded using constant current densities that ranged from 0.5 to 10 A g−1.
