Conclusions
Reported here is a detailed experimental analysis of the surface-liquid grain binding behaviour in the solid electrolyte LiCl·DMF using microscopy, DSC, and XRD. An analysis of dynamical behaviours in crystals of DMF·LiCl at the molecular level using MD and DFT quantum calculations is presented. The findings predict accurately a number of experimentally observed phenomena about this system, namely: the crystal packing arrangement, the temperature of decomposition, the mechanism of decomposition by expulsion of DMF from the LiCl lattice, the liquid like boundary layer, the evaporation of DMF from the surface of the crystal, the physical density, bulk conductivity, and most importantly, the increased mobility of ions in the boundary layer vs. the bulk. More specifically, the simulations predict that the structural organization of Li+ and Cl− ions remains unaffected as observed from RDFs from 100 K to 350 K. However the CDFs show vanishing secondary solvation structures in the bulk system indicating the collapse of structure at around 350 K. The average intra-residue Li+⋯Cl− distances show higher fluctuations on the surface compared to the bulk, which is further supported by the examination of ionic mobility LiCl·DMF. The observed liquid-like behaviour at the surface is likely applicable to a wide range of “soft” solid electrolytes, such as this, and another previously reported DMF–NaClO4 system.13 Similarly, they may be applicable to other soft-solid systems like polymer electrolytes, but not likely to ceramic electrolytes due to their rigidity, and large melting points. The non-bonding IEs from simulations show that the Li+⋯Cl− interactions firmly stabilize post-decomposition whereas the DMF⋯Li+ interactions are destabilized. Results from DFT ascertain the preference of decomposition of the material before any melting from the analysis of fragmentation, dimerization and tetramerization processes. The most favourable process is dimer to monomer dissociation, after which follows decomposition of crystals to DMF and LiCl, as observed experimentally. The tetramer to monomer dissociation (directly or via dimer) is least favourable. The results from MD simulations and DFT calculations support well all of the experimental observations validating the approach as a valuable tool for understanding the behaviour of this promising new class of electrolyte materials at the molecular level, and for gaining insight into how we may optimize their function by improved design.
