Conclusion
A new n-type organic/inorganic hybrid, C6H4NH2CuBr2I, prepared by a solution coating method has a similar ABX3 structure to popular organic/inorganic hybrid perovskites. The C6H4NH2CuBr2I film exhibits a considerably high electrical conductivity of 3.6 × 103 S cm−1 at room temperature with a corresponding concentration of 8.7 × 1020 cm−3. The Seebeck coefficient of the C6H4NH2CuBr2I sample reaches −69.5 μV K−1 at room temperature, leading to a power factor of up to 1740 μW mK−2, which is the highest power factor ever reported for organic/inorganic hybrid thermoelectric materials. The temperature dependence of the electrical conductivity and Seebeck coefficient indicates that the C6H4NH2CuBr2I sample behaves like metallic materials, which could be attributed to the spontaneous electron doping induced by the reduction of CuII. A part of the CuII sites can be reduced and replaced by CuI during an annealing process, leading to negatively charged defects and contributing to the high carrier concentration in the C6H4NH2CuBr2I film. The existence of CuI could be proved by photoluminescence at room temperature under the excitation of 360 nm. Therefore, the high electrical conductivity of the C6H4NH2CuBr2I film can be attributed to the self-doping behavior caused by CuI. Compared with other thermoelectric materials with similar electrical conductivities, the C6H4NH2CuBr2I film exhibits a relatively large Seebeck coefficient, which is due to the coexisting entropy difference and polarization difference. The polarization difference arises from the coupling between the local electrical polarization and thermal vibration and can function as an additional driving force, leading to the enhanced Seebeck effect and extremely high power factor. In addition, it is also predicted that the coupling between electrical polarization and thermal vibration can lead to a lattice softening in the organic/inorganic hybrid perovskite, which provides a possible effective approach to reduce the thermal conductivity in C6H4NH2CuBr2I. As a consequence, the hybrid C6H4NH2CuBr2I with an extremely high power factor shows great potential as a promising n-type thermoelectric material. Considering the Au/C6H4NH2CuBr2I/Au sample as an element of a thermoelectric generator, the output power can be calculated from thermoelectric voltage (VTE) and thermoelectric current (ITE), and the obtained output power density is 25.6 nW cm−2 (ΔT = 4.8 °C) near room temperature, suggesting its potential application as an n-type element in thermoelectric power generators.
