8.Conclusion and summary
This review article provides a broad outlook on LSB performance improvements through different separator coatings. These separator coatings are grouped into three major categories: carbon materials, polymer materials and inorganic materials. In each section, the underlying mechanisms inhibiting PS migration are discussed. These mechanisms include physical separation, physical confinement and chemical confinement, i.e. polar–polar, Lewis base and catenation interactions.
The key LSB performance parameters considered are the initial performance and the degradation rate. These results are discussed in regard to the coating material, C-rate and sulfur loading (mg cm−2). That said, cell parameters such as the sulfur content and E/S ratio are also important, but in many cases this information is not included in reported studies. Beyond this, LSB performance parameters including energy efficiency will be critical in defining whether a LSB will be commercially viable, but once again in most cases this information is not included.
Many research groups have worked with carbon coating materials, due to their high electrical conductivity57 and relatively high surface areas.74 For these highly porous materials, physical confinement is the major PS trapping mechanism. Various carbon materials, e.g. porous carbon with different sizes, highly conductive carbon and graphene have been explored. Moreover, carbon coating materials have been modified through doping and adding polar functional groups. However, if we look closely at these LSBs, we see that it is difficult to achieve high initial capacities and a low decay rate at the same time. In this regard, it is also interesting that the basic porous carbon MPC66 and MWCNTs73 perform very well despite the lack of dopants or functional groups to trap PSs.
For polymer coating materials, PVDF, Nafion and functional polymers, e.g. PAN with different functional groups, are discussed. Polar–polar attractions are the dominate mechanism limiting PS migration in the polymer family. In regard to the initial capacity, rGO-PVDF (1322 mA h g−1)112 and g-PLiSS (1292 mA h g−1)118 are promising. But when taking their decay rate into account, those two studies become average (0.25 and 0.75, respectively). Conversely, polypyrrole work127 showed a low degradation rate (0.03%), but unfortunately the initial capacity was poor. Finally, it is important to note that most polymer coating work was conducted with low sulfur loadings.
Regarding inorganic coatings, these materials provide a very wide range of PS trapping sources. The most commonly used inorganic coating materials are metal oxides. When assessing the battery performance with inorganic coatings, we see the same trend as what was observed with the carbon and polymer coatings i.e. cells which show good initial capacities are highly unlikely to produce acceptable decay rates. However, some new materials present exciting new opportunities such as C3N3. This graphitic carbon nitride provides a high density of pyridinic N-groups to trap the migrating PS phases. Although pyridinic N has been used in various doped carbon structures, the results are not impressive. This suggests that even though pyridinic N is a strong PS trapping site, the density in N-doped carbons is insufficient for LSB separator coating requirements.
From the work reviewed, it is concluded that a conductive separating coating is key to the success of the final LSB. Electrically conductive coatings:
•produce a higher initial capacity;
•can act as an upper current collector to facilitate sulfur reutilization;
•typically produce a LSB with a lower overpotential through facilitating electrochemical reactions – increasing the cell energy efficiency.
8.1.Impact of other cell parameters
When compiling the data, it is not always possible to provide a fair comparison as some critical cell information is missing. In many publications, authors focus on the initial capacity (mA h g−1) but omit information including the sulfur loading, sulfur content, E/S ratio and separator coating loading. These parameters have a major impact on the LSB performance and will also define whether the LSB is commercially relevant.
Sulfur loading (mg cm−2)
Sulfur loading is a key cell parameter for LSBs. The sulfur loading determines the areal capacity (mA h cm−2) and in turn the energy density (W h kg−1). For a LIB to be commercially viable it must have an areal capacity higher than 4 mA h cm−2.50 As such, for LSBs to be a real alternative to LIBs the lab-based areal capacity needs to be at least 6 mA h cm−2.167 This requires a sulfur loading of around 3.6 mg cm−2,168 if a theoretical discharge capacity of 1675 mA h g−1 is considered. A large fraction of LSB work is conducted with sulfur loadings below 2 mg cm−2. Beyond this only a few studies in this review98,119,144,155 had an areal capacity higher than 4 mA h cm−2.
By increasing the sulfur loading, more demand is placed on the separator to stop the migration of PSs. In addition, if the sulfur loading is increased and the C-rate is unchanged, the operating current density will be increased. This increased current density will place additional demand on all the LSB components and will further facilitate dendrite growth and corrosion of current collect layers. Although it can be interesting to explore mechanistic understanding at low sulfur loading, more work is required to demonstrate high areal capacity at high sulfur loading.
C rate and electrolyte/sulfur ratio
The electrolyte/sulfur (E/S) ratio is also an important cell parameter that needs to be considered when trying to achieve reversible cycling performance. In LSBs the electrolyte viscosity is dependent on the depth of discharge. This has a direct impact on the lithium ion diffusivity and associated electrochemical reactions. As such, an appropriate E/S ratio is needed to maintain the reversible electrochemical reactions and the lithium ion diffusion rate.169 Also, insufficient electrolyte can dry the cell leading to premature failure. The E/S ratio in conjunction with the C-rate has a direct impact on the LSB degradation behaviour. A low degradation is typically observed for LSBs with a
1. low sulfur loading;
2. high E/S;
3. high C-rate.170
Increasing the E/S ratio decreases the LSB energy density, but can have a favourable impact on the LSB degradation rate. Therefore, an optimised E/S ratio is critical when designing a full LSB cell. As shown in Table 3, information on the E/S ratio is often missing from reported work.
Degradation rate
For commercial production, the LSB must have a sufficiently high areal capacity with a good cycling stability. The life-time driving distance for an EV is set at 200 000 km with an expectation that the battery will last for around 10 years.171 However, the degradation rate of the LSBs reviewed in this work is too high to achieve this target. Only a very limited number of studies obtained degradation rates below 0.05%.53,80,98,127,151,159 Beyond this, for most experiments, the cycle number is limited to 200 cycles.
It is also difficult to compare degradation rates in general. The degradation of LSBs is often characterised by two regions – the initial decayed region and a second region where the degradation has stabilized. As such, a cell tested for a short period, say less than 200 cycles, may show a higher decay rate, which may stabilize during a long-term cycling test. To be able to provide a fairer comparison, an additional column has been added in Table 3 which shows the degradation rate for the first 200 cycles – which is where the most rapid degradation would occur.
