All-solid-state interpenetrating network polymer electrolytes for long cycle life of lithium metal batteriesThis manuscript has been authored by UT-Battelle, LLC under contract no. DE-AC05-00OR22725 with the U.S. Department of Energy. The United States Government retains and the publisher, by accepting the article for publication, acknowledges that the United States Government retains a non-exclusive, paid-up, irrevocable, world-wide license to publish or reproduce the published form of this manuscript, or allow others to do so, for United States Government purposes. The Department of Energy will provide public access to these results of federally sponsored research in accordance with the DOE Public Access Plan (http://energy.gov/downloads/doe-public-access-plan).Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: DSC, XRD, and VTF fitting. See DOI: 10.1039/c8ta03062f
A star-shape polymer of 3-armed poly(ethylene glycol) methyl ether methacrylate-co-glycidyl methacrylate copolymer (3PPEGM-co-GMA) was synthesized using an atom transfer radical polymerization (ATRP) technique. All-solid-state interpenetrating network polymer electrolytes (INSPEs) were fabricated by simultaneous reaction of 3PPEGM-co-GMA and bisphenol A diglycidyl ether (BPDE) with polyetherdiamine (ED2003) in the presence of lithium bis(trifluoromethane) sulfonamide (LiTFSI). The INSPEs exhibited ionic conductivities higher than 10−5 S cm−1 at room temperature, a high oxidation stability of 4.5 vs. Li/Li+ and remarkable stability towards lithium metal. Li metal batteries with LiFePO4 as the cathode and INSPEs as the electrolyte cycled at a current rate of 0.1C at 60 °C showed a high initial discharge capacity of 156.2 mA h g−1 and a stable cycling performance over 200 cycles with a high coulombic efficiency of 99%. The results demonstrate that the interpenetrating network polymer electrolytes are promising electrolytes for next generation lithium-based batteries with high ionic conductivity, improved safety, and stable electrochemical performance.