2.Experimental details
2.1EPD of the separator
Poly(vinylidene fluoride-co-hexafluoropropylene) (PVdF–HFP – Mw = 570 000–600 000 g mol−1) was purchased from Solvay. 2.1 g PVdF–HFP powder was dispersed in acetone under magnetic stirring and then the suspension was placed in a hot water bath until a homogeneous translucent solution was obtained. Then, an electric field of 144 V cm−1 was applied to the solution with an aluminum (Al) substrate for separator deposition and a graphite sheet for electric field control. The Al substrate was an Al foil case supported by a glass frame. After a 1 min deposition, the Al substrate was dried in ambient airflow. For the phase inversion method, the PVdF–HFP powder was dissolved in a mixture of acetone and NMP under magnetic stirring until a homogeneous solution was obtained, and then dry ethanol was added. After a homogeneous transparent solution was formed, it was coated on Al foil and dried at 50 °C overnight. After drying, the separators were detached from the Al substrates for further analysis.
2.2EPD of a half battery
As shown in Fig. 1b, an anode slurry prepared with graphite, Ketjenblack and PVdF in a mass ratio of 7 : 1.5 : 1.5 was coated onto Cu foil using a doctor blade and dried at 50 °C overnight. Then it was punched into 16 mm circular discs before the EPD process. The graphite disc was inserted into the hole of Al foil supported by a glass frame, forming a connected unit to hold the graphite anode in position. The EPD process was conducted on this substrate. After drying, the separator was stripped off the substrate with the anode material bonded together, leaving empty Cu foil and an Al support.
(a) Colloidal formation process and molecular interactions in the PVdF–HFP/acetone colloidal solution. The binding energies of acetone with VdF and HFP monomers are 0.79 eV and 0.92 eV. Grey, white, red and cyan spheres represent carbon, hydrogen, oxygen and fluorine atoms, respectively. Blue surfaces correspond to a charge gain of 0.15 e Å−3 and yellow surfaces denote an equivalent charge loss. (b) Schematics of the EPD process of the half lithium ion battery. The separator side and the anode side of the separator–anode structure and the EPD separator deposited on an Al substrate are displayed, respectively. (c and d) SEM images of the EPD separator. (e) Contact angle test of the electrolyte on the EPD separator (0 s, 2 s, 5 s and 8 s upon contact).
2.3Characterization
The surface morphology of the EPD separator was studied by using an environmental field emission scanning electron microscope (FEI/Quanta 450 FEG, Czech Republic). A tensile testing machine (CMT6104, China) was employed to evaluate the mechanical properties of the separators. The surface contact angle test was conducted using a ThetaLite (Biolin instrument, Finland). Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy (FT-IR) was performed with a Nicolet iS5 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). X-ray diffraction (XRD) was performed with an XRD spectrometer (MAX-2550-VB3, Rigaku) equipped with a Cu (Kα = 1.54178 Å) radiation source operated at 40 kV and 100 mA over the 2θ range of 5–80°. The thermal shrinkage results were obtained at temperatures from 80 °C to 180 °C by annealing the samples for 5 h. The thermal shrinkage was calculated usingwhere D0 and Df are the initial diameter at room temperature and the final diameter after heat treating. The electrolyte uptake was measured by weighing the masses of various separators before and after submerging them in the electrolyte solution for 10 min in a glove box filled with dry argon. The percentage of the electrolyte uptake was determined bywhere W0 and Wf are the initial and final weighed masses of the separator. The AC impedance was analyzed with the separator sandwiched between two stainless steel disks in a frequency range from 0.10 Hz to 1.0 MHz. The ionic conductivity was calculated usingwhere T, R and A are the thickness, the bulk resistance and the surface area of the separator, respectively.
2.4Electrochemical measurements
Coin cells (LIR2032) were assembled and tested with a Neware battery testing system (China) in a galvanostatic cycling range from 2.0 V to 0.01 V at room temperature. The electrolyte was lithium hexafluorophosphate (LiPF6) in ethylene carbonate (EC) : dimethyl carbonate (DMC) : ethyl methyl carbonate (EMC) electrolyte (30 : 15 : 20 : 35 in weight) with 2 wt% vinylene carbonate (VC). Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements were performed using a CHI760E electrochemical workstation (Shanghai Chenhua, China) with an open-circuit potential over a frequency range from 0.10 Hz to 1.0 MHz. The cyclic voltammetry (CV) analysis was performed using an MSTAT test system (Arbin, USA) at a scan rate of 0.5 mV s−1 in the voltage window of 0–2 V using a half cell.
2.5First principles calculations
Density functional theory (DFT) simulations were performed by using the Cambridge Sequential Total Energy Package (CASTEP), which employed the Perdew–Burke–Ernzerhof exchange–correlation functional within the generalized gradient approximation (GGA). The DFT-D (D represents dispersion) method was used to simulate the adsorption of an acetone molecule on the polymer chain segments of three vinylidene fluoride (VdF) monomers and two hexafluoropropylene (HFP) monomers, respectively. A lattice parameter of 30 Å was set to avoid interactions arising from periodicity. An energy cut-off was set to be 380 eV for the plane-wave basis in all calculations. The criteria for the convergence of energy and forces in atomic relaxation were set to be 5 × 10−6 eV per atom and 0.01 eV Å−1, respectively. A 1 × 1 × 1 k-point grid was used to sample the Brillouin zones. Binding energies for compounds were calculated byEbinding = Eacetone + ES − Ecombinewhere S represents the chain segments of VdF or HFP monomers.
