2.Experimental
2.1.Materials, polymerization and treatment of PEDOT:OTf films
3,4-Ethylenedioxythiophene (EDOT), anhydrous ethanol and iron(iii) trifluoromethanesulfonate (Fe(OTf)3) were purchased from Heraeus, Merck and BOC Sciences, respectively. All other chemicals including N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP) and polyethylene glycol–polypropylene glycol–polyethylene glycol (PEG–PPG–PEG, Mw = 5800) were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich. All the chemicals were used as received without further purification.
The PEDOT:OTf films were prepared on glass substrates of 1.3 × 1.3 cm2 according to the literature.42 Fe(OTf)3 (63 mg) was dissolved in a solution (0.5 mL) containing 20 wt% PEG–PPG–PEG, 7 wt% NMP and 73 wt% ethanol. The precursor solution was prepared by adding 10 μL of EDOT into the Fe(OTf)3 solution. After being stirred for 2 min and then sonicated for 30 s, the solution was spin-coated on glass substrates at 4500 rpm for 20 s. The polymerization took place on a hot plate at 70 °C for 15 min. The polymer films were then rinsed with ethanol twice and finally dried at 120 °C.
The post treatment of the PEDOT:OTf films was conducted by dropping 100 μL of aqueous solution onto them at room temperature. After sitting in air for several minutes (2 min for NaOH treatment and 10 min for other treatments), the PEDOT:OTf films were rinsed with isopropanol (IPA) three times and then dried with nitrogen flow.
2.2.Characterization
The electrical conductivities of the PEDOT:OTf films were measured by the van der Pauw four probe technique using a Keithley 2400 source/meter. The electrical contacts were made by pressing indium on the four corners of each PEDOT:OTf thin film on the glass substrate. The Seebeck coefficients of the PEDOT:OTf films were measured in an ambient environment using a home-built system, which consisted of two Peltier devices (TEC1-19906 by Beijing Geshang Electronic Pte. Ltd.) affixed on an alumina heat sink. The details of the Seebeck coefficient measurement can be found in our previous reports.30,34
UV-vis-NIR absorption spectra of PEDOT:OTf films were taken with a Shimadzu-1800 spectrometer. The double layered PEDOT:OTf films were used for the UV-vis-NIR absorption spectra measurement. Cyclic voltammograms (CV) were recorded in a 1.0 M KCl solution with an ECO CHEMIE AUTOLAB PGSTAT 302N + FRA2 system. The working electrode was a Pt disc coated with PEDOT:OTf films, and the counter and reference electrodes were a Pt wire and Ag/AgCl (3 M KCl), respectively. The scan rate was 50 mV s−1. Atomic force microscopic (AFM) images were acquired using a Veeco NanoScope IV Multi-Mode AFM in the tapping mode. The thicknesses of the PEDOT:OTf films were determined using an Alpha 500 step profiler. Temperature dependences of the resistivities of the polymer films were tested using a Janis Research VPF-475 dewar with liquid nitrogen as the coolant and a Conductus LTC-11 temperature controller. Raman spectra were obtained in back scattering configuration using a Jobin Yvon Horiba LabRam HR 800 Raman system with an Ar+ laser (514.5 nm) as the excitation source. X-ray photoelectron spectra (XPS) of PEDOT:OTf were collected using an Axis Ultra DLD X-ray photoelectron spectrometer equipped with an Al Kα X-ray source (1486.6 eV). The variations of the electrical conductivity and Seebeck coefficient with time were measured for the polymer films in air under ambient conditions (temperature of ∼25 °C and a relative humidity of ∼70%).
