Conclusions
In this work, a series of SPEs with comb-like structures were synthesized via solvent-free copolymerization. Monomers with different molecular weights were used in the polymer structure to tune the electrochemical properties of the SPEs. Among the prepared SPEs, SPE-1 exhibited excellent thermal stability (up to 331 °C), high ionic conductivity (2.85 × 10−4 S cm−1 at 60 °C), a wide electrochemical window (5.05 V) and good compatibility with the lithium electrode. Therefore, on the basis of the excellent electrochemical properties of SPE-1, two kinds of all-solid-state lithium batteries, namely, a monopolar cell and a bipolar cell, were fabricated. The monopolar LFP-SPE-1/Li cell displayed higher reversible capacity (163.9 mA h g−1 at 0.1C at 60 °C), with a capacity retention of 75% after 200 cycles. Notably, the monopolar cell could even work well at ambient temperature, with a stabilized discharge capacity of 100 mA h g−1 at 0.1C over 60 cycles, and the capacity retention was as high as 90%. In particular, taking advantage of the non-liquidity of SPE-1, a bipolar cell was assembled successfully with a voltage plateau of 6.07 V, and the cell delivered an initial discharge capacity of 136.3 mA h g−1 at 0.5C at 60 °C after 40 cycles with a capacity retention of 76%. Moreover, the bipolar cell exhibited excellent safety and could operate under conditions of bending and cutting, as well as penetration by a nail. Solid-state cells with a tandem structure are beneficial for improving the volumetric energy density, as well as enhancing the reliability of cell packs, which is extremely suitable for applications in electric vehicles. However, the increased interfacial resistance that arises from the tandem structure will severely affect the cell performance, to which more attention should be paid in the future. Consequently, this work provides an advanced strategy for the facile synthesis of polymer electrolytes, as well as the fabrication of bipolar cells with high voltages, and the integration of the cathode and SPE could not only simplify the process of assembling the cell, but also be beneficial for reducing the interfacial resistance. The SPEs and all-solid-state lithium batteries that were developed possess great potential for applications in high-voltage devices and systems.
