Experimental
Preparation of the NanoIL GPE
The nanostructured IL, SiO2PPTFSI, was synthesized according to the literature procedure as described in the ESI. The hybrid nanofibrous membrane was prepared using an electrospinning machine (ET-2535H, Ucalery Tech Inc., China), as illustrated in Scheme 1. The slurry for the SiO2PPTFSI/PVDF–HFP membrane was prepared by mixing SiO2PPTFSI and PVDF–HFP in DMF solvent, wherein the weight ratio of SiO2PPTFSI/PVDF–HFP/DMF was fixed at 1 : 9 : 95. The slurry was supplied using a 5 mL syringe with a steel needle, and the feeding rate was 0.2–0.4 mm min−1 under a positive voltage (15 kV) and negative voltage (−2.5 kV) with a distance of 10 cm maintained between the needle tip and collector. The reference PVDF–HFP membrane was prepared by a similar method without incorporating the SiO2PPTFSI. The membrane was cut into discs with a diameter of 16 mm, which were then dried in a vacuum oven at 50 °C for 12 h to remove residual solvent. Finally, the membrane was filled and swollen in a liquid electrolyte in order to obtain a gel polymer electrolyte (GPE) in an argon filled glove box.
Illustration of the preparation of the NanoIL GPE.
Characterization of the NanoIL GPE
The thickness of the SiO2PPTFSI/PVDF–HFP nanofibrous membrane was recorded using a measuring membrane apparatus (CH1ST, Shanghai Milite Precise Instrument Co., Ltd., China), and its morphology was surveyed by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) (SU8020, Hitachi, Japan) after gold spraying. The mechanical properties of the nanofibrous membranes were measured using a Dynamic Mechanical Analyzer (Q800, TA Instruments, USA) at a speed of 0.01 N min−1 at room temperature. The size of the samples for the mechanical tests was 6 mm × 30 mm. Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC, Mettler-Toledo, Switzerland) was carried out to test the thermal stability of the IL-modified membrane, with the results shown in Fig. S2. Both membranes exhibit similar melting temperatures, thus proving that IL modification results in no significant influence on the thermal stability.
The porosities of the membranes, determined after soaking the membranes in n-butanol for 2 h, were calculated using eqn (1), where Wdry and Wwet are the weights of the membrane before and after soaking in n-butanol, respectively, ρ is the density of n-butanol, and Vdry is the volume of the dry membrane.1
An FEC functionalized liquid electrolyte, composed of 1 M lithium hexafluorophosphate (LiPF6) and 0.1 M lithium difluoro(oxalato)borate (LiDFOB) in dimethyl carbonate (DMC) : ethylene carbonate (EC) : fluoroethylene carbonate (FEC) (in a weight ratio of 6 : 2 : 2), was used as a plasticizer for the nanofibrous membranes in order to achieve better high-voltage stability and avoid the influence of electrolyte oxidation in the GPE performance study. In order to investigate the effect of SiO2PPTFSI in the membrane, electrolyte uptakes were measured in an argon filled glove box. The dry membranes were soaked in electrolyte for 2 h, then wiped with tissue paper to remove residue electrolyte and weighed.47 The electrolyte uptakes were calculated using eqn (2), in which W0 (g) and W (g) are the weights of the membrane before and after soaking in the liquid electrolyte, respectively.2
The ionic conductivities (σ) of the different electrolytes were calculated using eqn (3), in which S is the area, d is the thickness of the separator, and Rb (Ω) is the bulk resistance probed by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) in Stainless Steel (SS)/electrolyte/SS symmetric cells. The impedance was measured using a CHI4660D electrochemical workstation by sweeping from 100 kHz to 0.01 Hz with an amplitude of 5 mV at room temperature,22 and the same conditions were used in all of the following EIS tests.3
The lithium ion transference number was measured using a method reported in previous works47–49 and calculated using eqn (4), in which I0 and Is are the initial and steady state currents measured by chronoamperometry (CA, carried out using the CHI4660D workstation) testing of the lithium symmetrical cell; likewise, R0 and Rs refer to the interfacial resistances before and after polarization. ΔV (0.01 V) is the applied voltage difference.4
The electrochemical performances were tested in Li/electrolyte/LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4 cells. The cathode was prepared by mixing LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4 (80%), Super P (10%) and polyvinylidene difluoride (PVDF, 10%) together and dispersing in N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP) by ball milling to obtain a slurry. The slurry was then cast on an aluminium current collector and dried in an oven at 80 °C for 6 h in order to remove the solvent. The electrode was cut into discs with a diameter of 14 mm, which were then further dried in a vacuum oven at 60 °C for 12 h and used as the cathode in the tests. Cyclic voltammetry (CV) was performed at room temperature using the same CHI4660D electrochemical workstation as used for EIS, with a scan rate of 0.1 mV s−1 used within a potential range of 3.5 V to 4.9 V. The charge–discharge cycling and rate performance were tested using a LAND battery cycle system (Wuhan Blue Electric Co., LTD, China) within a potential range of 3.5 to 4.9 V at a rate of 1C. The rate performance was measured in a constant-current charge–discharge mode at different rates of 0.1, 0.2, 0.5, 1, 2, 4 and 6C (1C = 130 mA h g−1).
