Experimental details
Electrolyte deposition
LBCO films were deposited in a Savannah S200 (Ultratech/Cambridge Nanotech, Inc.) integrated with an Ar-filled glovebox. The ability to prevent air-exposure before and after deposition reduces the possibility of reactions leading to undesirable surface reactions that alter the composition and purity of the films prior to characterization. Lithium tert-butoxide (97%, Sigma Aldrich) was heated to 170 °C in a stainless steel cylinder and pulse time of 4.0 s, exposure time of 2.0 s, and purge time of 60 s was used. Triisopropyl borate (98%, Sigma Aldrich) was kept at ambient temperature in a stainless steel cylinder and a pulse time of 0.15 s, exposure time of 2.0 s, and purge time of 20 s was used. A carrier gas flow rate of 20 sccm Ultra High Purity Ar was used during purging of the LiOtBu, 10 sccm during purging of the TIB and ozone, and 5 sccm during precursor exposure. Ozone was produced by a UV ozone generator (Ultratech, Inc.) from Ultra High Purity O2. Substrate temperatures between 200 °C and 260 °C were used. A lid-integrated in situ quartz crystal microbalance was used to monitor film growth.
Film characterization
Ellipsometry was conducted with a Woollam M-2000 with a Si (100) substrate and data were fit with a Cauchy model. An FEI Helios Nanolab 650 SEM/FIB was used for SEM analysis. The etched Si trenches were first Piranha cleaned to remove contaminants. A ∼50 nm ZnO film was deposited via ALD to provide a conductive surface to minimize charging and increase contrast between the LBCO film and the substrate. Following the LBCO deposition, the structure was cleaved perpendicular to the trenches to reveal the cross-section.
A Kratos Axis Ultra was used for XPS analysis. A monochromated Al source was used. For survey scans, a 160 eV pass energy and 700 × 300 μm sample area. An Ar ion source with 4 kV accelerating voltage and 200 μA extractor current was used for sputtering off any surface film. For high resolution core scans, a pass energy of 20 eV was used, and the C–C peak at 284.8 eV was used for energy calibration. CasaXPS was used for peak fitting with Shirley backgrounds.
Computational modeling
First principles calculations were performed using a plane wave basis set and the projector augmented wave (PAW) method,74,75 as implemented in the Vienna Ab initio Simulation Package (VASP)76 Phase stability as a function of electrochemical potential was assessed using the Pymatgen77 by combining amorphous LBO and LBCO phases from the present DFT calculations with crystalline phases from the Materials Project (MP) database.78 These data are summarized in the ESI. Amorphous models for LBO and LBCO glasses were generated using AIMD. The AIMD procedure is described in greater detail in the ESI. Calculated structural parameters for all of the crystalline and amorphous phases investigated are summarized in Table S5.
The diffusivity of lithium ions was calculated using AIMD at five temperatures: 1000 K, 800 K, 700 K, 600 K, and 500 K. Mean squared displacement (MSD) data were collected over a 40 ps window at each temperature ranging from 700 to 1000 K, and a with a 100 ps window for the two lower temperatures (500 and 600 K). In all simulations the MSD were recorded after an equilibration time of 5 ps. The diffusion coefficient, D, was obtained by calculating the MSD of Li ions over a time t,where, d = 3 is the dimensionality of the system, t0 is the initial time, and the angled brackets indicate an average over all Li ions.
In addition to calculating diffusion coefficients, the probability densities associated with the magnitudes of ionic displacements were evaluated for both cations and ions. Densities were calculated from ionic trajectories collected over 60 ps at 500 K. Ion positions were sampled using a regular grid of dimension 50 × 50 × 50. Rotational displacements of the borate and carbonate anions were also monitored by calculating changes to the B–O and C–O bond vectors, respectively, from their initial values. Finally, the band gaps of all phases investigated were evaluated using the HSE06 hybrid functional and G0W0 method; these data are reported in Table S4 and Fig. S9 in the ESI.
Electrochemical characterization
Ionic conductivity
In-plane impedance measurements were conducted using a microprobe station inside of an Ar filled glovebox. ALD films were deposited onto interdigitated platinum electrodes with a 5 μm gap (Dropsens). Each electrode had 250 fingers each 6750 μm in length. Through-plane conductivity measurements were conducted by depositing the electrolyte on a conductive substrate (Au, SS) and then evaporating Li metal through a shadowmask to define the top electrode. A Nexdep evaporator (Angstrom Engineering, Inc.) with a molybdenum crucible was used to deposit a 2 μm Li film. The bottom electrode was exposed by removing the ALD film using 2000 grit sandpaper, and each electrode was contacted using a tungsten needle on a microprobe station (Signatone) inside an Ar glovebox. Potentiostatic electrochemical impedance spectroscopy was carried out using an SP-200 potentiostat (Bio-logic) between 7 MHz and 0.1 Hz with a 10 mV amplitude. Temperature was controlled and monitored with a Watlow EZ-zone controller connected to a Watlow ultramic heater, and temperatures were allowed to stabilize for 5 minutes prior to measurement. Not all samples were directly measured at 25 °C due to the need for active cooling of the glovebox atmosphere and long cooling times necessary to reach that temperature after heating. For samples for which this was not done, the activation energy was used to extrapolate down to 25 °C. Ionic conductivity values were calculated from resistance values fitted to the equivalent circuits found in the ESI.
Electrochemical stability
Electrochemical stability was tested in the TP-Li/SS cells by several methods. First EIS was conducted periodically to monitor changes in the impedance of the film. Second, cyclic voltammetry was performed with a scan rate of 0.1 mV s−1 to observe the flow of current at a range of applied potentials. Finally, staircase potentiostatic electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (SPEIS) was performed in both the positive and negative scan directions from Voc. Since these cells have an open circuit voltage of more than 1 volt, one cell is used for the positive step direction, and another is used for the negative step direction. In this method,20 a DC bias is applied to the cell for a period of time that allows the current to stabilize, in this case 600 seconds was used. A measure of the DC conductivity was calculated from the average current in the final 100 seconds. Subsequently, potentiostatic EIS is performed about that DC bias potential, and fitting to an equivalent circuit is used to extract an ionic conductivity. A schematic of the applied voltage and current response for this technique is shown in the ESI. This technique provides both ionic and electronic conductivity as a function of applied potential. This provides a more complete picture of the stability of a solid electrolyte material than cyclic voltammetry.
Full cell fabrication
Full cells were fabricated by depositing V2O5via ALD. Vanadium oxytriisopropoxide (VTIP) and water were used as precursors. The deposition was performed in a custom lab-built ALD tool with an Ar carrier gas flow rate of 70 sccm, a pressure of 3.5 torr, and a temperature of 150 °C. Additional Ar gas was used in a “vapor boost” setup to assist in mass transport of the VTIP to the deposition chamber due to the low vapor pressure of the VTIP. The as-deposited V2O5 films are amorphous by XRD. The films are then moved into the Ar glovebox and the LBCO solid electrolyte is deposited on top of the V2O5. Immediately following this deposition, 2.2 mm diameter Li metal top electrodes were deposited through a shadowmask. The bottom current collector is contacted by sanding away the ALD films, and the top electrode/current collector (Li metal) is contacted with a microprobe, as described above.
