Experimental section
Materials
N,N′-Dimethylacetamide (DMAc) was obtained from Alfa Aesar and dried by vacuum distillation at 130 °C over CaH2. Decafluorobiphenyl (DFBP), 4,4′-(hexafluoroisopropylidene)diphenol (HFBPA), 6-bromohexanoyl chloride, AlCl3, 1,2-dichloroethane, triethylsilane, and trifluoroacetic acid were obtained from Alfa Aesar. 4,4′-(9-Fluorenylidene)diphenol (BPFL) was obtained from TCI Co. Ltd. Potassium carbonate (K2CO3) and dichloromethane (DCM) were purchased from BDH chemicals. All chemicals were used as received unless otherwise noted.
Synthesis of hydrophobic and hydrophilic oligomers
The synthetic procedure for the hydrophobic oligomer with three repeat units (x = 3) is as follows: DFBP (1.67 g, 5 mmol) and HFBPA (1.68 g, 5 mmol) were dissolved in 20 mL of DMAc in a 100 mL three-neck round bottom flask with a condenser under a N2 atmosphere at room temperature. K2CO3 (1.66 g, 12 mmol) was added to the solution and then the mixture was heated to 80 °C for 1 h. DFBP (0.5 g) was added to the mixture and allowed to react at 40 °C for 4 h to ensure that all the oligomers were terminated by hydroxyl. The viscous solution was poured into deionized water to precipitate the product. The white solid was isolated by filtration, washed three times with deionized water and dried overnight at 80 °C in a vacuum oven. Hydrophobic oligomers with a different number of repeat units were synthesized by controlling the reaction time.
Fluoro-terminated hydrophilic oligomer with five repeat units (y = 5) was synthesized via a similar procedure. BPFL (1.75 g, 5 mmol) and DFBP (1.67 g, 5 mmol) were dissolved in 20 mL of DMAc under a N2 atmosphere. K2CO3 (1.66 g, 12 mmol) was added to the solution and the mixture was reacted at 80 °C for 2 h. BPFL (0.6 g) was added to the mixture and reacted at 40 °C for 4 h. After precipitation, filtration and drying, a white solid was yielded. Similarly, hydrophilic oligomers with different amount of repeat units were obtained by varying the reaction time.
Synthesis of multiblock copoly(arylene ether)s (mPEs)
The hydrophobic oligomer (1.11 g, 0.5 mmol, x = 3) and hydrophilic oligomer (1.78 g, 0.5 mmol, y = 5) were dissolved in 20 mL of DMAc at room temperature under N2. K2CO3 (0.15 g, 1.1 mmol) was added to the solution and the mixture was reacted at 80 °C for 4 h. The viscous solution was poured into deionized water and a white solid was precipitated out. The product was filtered, washed with deionized water and dried overnight at 80 °C in a vacuum oven.
Synthesis of 1-tether BrKC6-mPEs
A multiblock copolymer mPE-X3Y5 (1.16 g, 1 mmol hydrophilic repeat units) was dissolved in 20 mL of DCM in a flask under a nitrogen atmosphere. The flask was chilled in an ice bath. 6-Bromohexanoyl chloride (0.6 mL, 4 mmol) and AlCl3 (0.54 g, 4 mmol) were added to the solution and then warmed to room temperature. The mixture was reacted for 5 h at room temperature. The solution was poured into 200 mL deionized water and heated to 60 °C to evaporate the solvent. The product was dissolved in DCM and precipitated in deionized water three times to obtain a purified light yellow solid.
Synthesis of 1-tether BrC6-mPEs
BrKC6-mPE-X3Y5 (1.32 g, 1 mmol hydrophilic repeat units) was dissolved in 20 mL of 1,2-dichloroethane in a three-neck round bottom flask with a condenser at room temperature under nitrogen. Trifluoroacetic acid (3.8 mL, 50 mmol) and triethylsilane (0.8 mL, 5 mmol) were added to the solution. The solution was heated to reflux for 24 h. After cooling to room temperature, it was poured into a NaOH solution (2 g NaOH, 200 mL of deionized water). The mixture was heated to 80 °C to evaporate the solvent. The product was isolated by filtration. The product was dissolved in DCE and precipitated in deionized water three times producing a white solid product.
Synthesis of multi-tether BrKC6-mPEs and BrC6-mPEs
Multi-tether BrKC6-mPEs and BrC6-mPEs were synthesized via repeated Friedel–Crafts and reduction reactions described in previous steps.
Membrane casting, quaternization and ion exchange
BrC6-mPEs (0.20 g) were dissolved in 5 mL of 1,2-dichloroethane and the resulting solution was filtered through a 0.45 μm poly(tetrafluoroethylene) (PTFE) membrane syringe filter into a 4 cm diameter aluminum dish. The solvent was evaporated in a tube furnace at 40 °C under nitrogen for 18 h. The free-standing membrane was about 40 μm thick.
The membrane was quaternized as follows: immersion in 45 wt% trimethylamine aqueous solution at room temperature for 48 h. After being removed from the solution, the quaternized membrane with a bromide counter ion was washed with deionized water three times. The membrane was soaked in 1 M KOH solution under nitrogen for 24 h to exchange the bromide ions for hydroxide ions. After being washed with deionized water three times, the membrane was stored in deionized water.
Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectra and gel permeation chromatography (GPC)
The chemical structure of oligomers and polymers was analyzed by a variety of NMR techniques, including one-dimensional 1H NMR and 19F NMR obtained with a Varian Mercury Vx 400 MHz spectrometer. Chloroform-d was used as the NMR solvent. Quantitative 19F NMR spectra were collected at 376.273 MHz with a 12.5 s relaxation delay.
The molecular weight of the polymers was determined by gel permeation chromatography (GPC) (Shimadzu) equipped with an LC-20 AD HPLC pump and a refractive index detector (RID-10 A, 120 V). Tetrahydrofuran (THF) was used as the eluent with a flow rate of 1.0 mL min−1 at 35 °C. The molecular weight was measured against a polystyrene standard.
Ionic conductivity
The ionic resistance of the membrane was measured with a four-probe, in-plane electrochemical impedance spectrometer over the frequency range from 1 Hz to 1 MHz with a PAR 2273 potentiostat. All samples were tested using HPLC-grade water under nitrogen to minimize the effect of CO2. The samples were equilibrated for 30 min prior to measurements. The in-plane ionic conductivity was calculated using eqn (1).1in eqn (1), σ is the ionic conductivity in S cm−1, L is the length between sensing electrodes in cm, W and T are the width and thickness of the membrane in cm, respectively, and R is the resistance measured in ohms.
Ion exchange capacity (IEC), water uptake (WU), hydration number (λ), number of freezable water (Nfree) and bound or non-freezable water (Nbound) molecules
The ion exchange capacity was calculated using 100% quaternization conversion of the alkyl bromide from NMR analysis as described in our previous work. The IEC was calculated using eqn (2).2
The water uptake of membranes was calculated using eqn (3).3in eqn (2), Md is the dry mass of the membranes measured after being dried in a vacuum for 24 h and Mw is the wet mass of the membranes without surface water. Both dry and wet membranes were in the OH− form and measured at room temperature. The number of water molecules per ionic group, hydration number λ, was calculated using eqn (4).4
The number of freezable water (Nfree) and bound water (or non-freezable water) (Nbound) molecules was determined by differential scanning calorimetry (DSC). DSC measurements were carried out using a DSC Q200 (TA Instruments). The membrane samples were fully-hydrated by soaking in deionized water at least for one week. After the water on the membrane surface was wiped off, a 3 to 5 mg of the sample was quickly sealed in an aluminum pan. The sample was cooled to −50 °C and heated to room temperature at a rate of 5 °C min−1 under N2 (20 mL min−1). The quantity of freezable and non-freezable water molecules was determined using eqn (5)–(7).26–285where Mfree is the mass of freezable water molecule and Mtot is the total mass of water molecule absorbed in the membranes. The weight fraction of the freezable water molecule was calculated using eqn (6).6where Hf is the enthalpy obtained by the integration of the DSC freezing peak and Hice is the enthalpy of fusion for water, corrected for the subzero freezing point according to eqn (7).7Hice = Hoice − ΔCpΔTfwhere ΔCp is the difference between the specific heat capacity of liquid water and ice. ΔTf is the freezing point depression.
Morphological characterization
Small angle X-ray scattering (SAXS) was used to analyze the morphology of AEMs. Dry membranes in the Br− form were tested using a Malvern Panalytical Empyrean XRD (Netherlands) with a Pixel 3D detector. The scattering experiments were carried out using Cu Kα radiation with a wavelength (l) of 1.542 Å generated within a high brilliance micro focus sealed tube with shaped multilayer optics operating at 45 kV and 40 mA. The wave vector (q) was calculated as:8where 2θ is the scattering angle. The characteristic separation length, or interdomain spacing (d) (i.e. the Bragg spacing) was calculated using eqn (9).9
Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) was also used to analyze the morphology of membranes. TEM was performed on a JEOL JEM-1400 Transmission Electron Microscope. The membranes in the bromide ion form were stained with osmium tetroxide at room temperature prior to examination. The stained membranes were embedded within an epoxy resin, sectioned into approximately 50 nm thick samples with a Leica UC6rt Ultramicrotome, and placed on copper grids for observation.
Thermal stability
The thermal stability of the hydroxide form of the membranes was analyzed by thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) on a TA Instruments Q50 analyzer. The thermal degradation was evaluated at a heating rate of 5 °C min−1 up to 800 °C under nitrogen.
Mechanical properties
The stress–strain relationship was investigated by dynamic mechanical analysis (DMA) using a TA Instruments Q800 with a controlled force mode. Rectangular membrane samples were fully hydrated and tested using tension clamps after removing surface water at 100% relative humidity. The experimental parameters were set as follows: preload force 0.05 N, isothermal at 30 °C, soak time 1 min, force ramp rate 0.5 N min−1 and upper force limit up to 18 N.
Alkaline stability
The alkaline stability of the membranes was evaluated by soaking the OH− form membranes in 1 M NaOH in a Teflon lined Parr reactor at 60 °C for up to 1000 h to measure the changes in ionic conductivity. Before measurements, each membrane was thoroughly washed with deionized water. The ionic conductivity was determined using HPLC-grade water at room temperature.
