Methodology
Experimental
Powder samples were synthesised under high pressure1 using starting materials Ln2O3 (Ln = La, Pr, Nd, Sm, 99.99%, Aldrich) and 100 mol% excess LiH (99.4%, Alfa Aesar). The raw materials were ground by hand using an agate mortar and pestle in an Ar-filled glovebox, and then encapsulated into a NaCl capsule. Fig. 1 shows a schematic illustration of the high-pressure synthesis cell. Mixtures of NaBH4 and Ca(OH)2 were placed as hydrogen sources at the top and bottom of the NaCl capsule and prevented from directly coming into contact with the initial materials by a boron nitride sleeve.
Schematic illustration of the high-pressure cell and the NaCl capsule used in the Ln2LiHO3 synthesis.
The NaCl capsule was then positioned in a pyrophyllite block, and high-pressure synthesis was conducted at 650 °C for 30 min under 2.0 GPa. Before the X-ray/neutron powder diffraction measurements, the obtained products were ground into the powder state by hand milling using a mortar and pestle. For phase identification, the resulting samples were subjected to X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements using CuKα1 radiation (Rigaku, SmartLab). The diffraction data were collected over a 2θ range from 10° to 80° with 0.01° steps. The crystal structures of the samples were determined using the time-of-flight neutron powder diffraction (NPD) data collected at BL09 SPICA in J-PARC. Rietveld refinements were performed on the NPD data using the Z-Rietveld program.16 Partial mixing of oxide and hydride ions in the axial sites was investigated using nuclear scattering density Fourier difference maps from the Rietveld refinement of the NPD data in the Z-MEM program.17 The crystal structures and differential Fourier maps were visualised using VESTA software.18 Thermal gravimetric (TG) and differential thermal (DTA) analyses were performed using a Rigaku Thermoplus EVO2 system at between 24 and 1000 °C under oxygen gas.
The ionic conductivity of the samples was evaluated via alternate current (AC) impedance measurements using a frequency response analyser (Biologic, VSP-300) with an applied voltage of 50–200 mV and a frequency range of 7 MHz to 1 Hz. Gold electrodes were deposited on both sides of the as-synthesised pellets (diameter ∼4.5 mm, thickness = 1–1.5 mm) using vacuum deposition. The conductivity temperature dependence was evaluated over a temperature range of 180 to 400 °C under a dry H2 atmosphere.
Computational
First-principles calculations were performed using the projector-augmented wave (PAW) method19 and the density functional theory generalised gradient approximation (GGA) with the Perdew–Burke–Ernzerhof (PBE) functional,20,21 as implemented in the VASP code.22–24 A plane-wave cut-off energy of 400 eV was used. In the nudged elastic band calculations used to obtain the activation barriers, 2 × 2 × 1 or 3 × 3 × 1 supercells of conventional Ln4Li2H2O6 cells were used, and gamma-centred k-meshes of 3 × 3 × 1 or 2 × 2 × 1 were employed. The vacancy defect charge compensation was achieved by changing the number of valence electrons in the supercell. The number of valence electrons was eight, zero, two and eight for Ln3+, Li+, H− and O2−, respectively. For example, a supercell with an O2− vacancy had eight fewer valence electrons than a perfect supercell. Computational lattice parameters were obtained by, first, fully relaxing the lattice parameters and internal coordinates of the conventional cell. Subsequent calculations were conducted with these lattice parameters, and internal coordinates were allowed to fully relax.
