4.Conclusions
Conducting cryogels prepared by the polymerization of aniline in frozen poly(vinyl alcohol) solutions are soft macroporous conducting materials, which are converted to aerogels by freeze-drying. The aerogels are converted to the corresponding carbogels after carbonization at 500–600 °C in an inert atmosphere. The macroporous morphology observed by scanning electron microscopy has not changed after the carbonization but the specific surface area substantially increased at the same time. The conductivity of aerogels was reduced during the carbonization due to the transformation to the base form of PANI. Impedance spectra of the samples of aerogels treated at elevated temperatures show Maxwell–Wagner–Sillars relaxation typical of heterogeneous composite systems with the contribution of ionic conductivity whereas after exposure to higher temperatures the impedance spectra reflect a very porous non-conductive carbon structure with about 95 vol% of pores. The highest capacitive response was found in sulfuric acid which amounted up to 170 F g−1 at a sweep rate of 5 mV s−1 for the sample treated at 500 °C. This corresponds to the enhanced structural disorder due to the presence of nitrogen and oxygen atoms observed by Raman spectroscopy in carbonized samples at 500 °C which is important for the improvement of capacitive performance. Capacitances of aerogels have minima across the whole pH range when the temperature treatment is performed at intermediate temperatures of 300–400 °C, presumably due to the change in the conductance mechanism. Switching in the capacitive response from that dominated by faradaic surface processes at lower treatment temperatures to that of double-layer charging at high temperature is evidenced. The obtained results also indicate that the capacitive response of the investigated materials is related to the surface spin density and that the specific capacitance (μF cm−2) is correlated with surface normalized spin density (spins m−2). These findings can be highly beneficial for the rational design of novel active materials for electrochemical capacitors.
