Experimental section
Material synthesis
rGO/Li anode preparation
We firstly synthesized the GO film by a slightly modified Hummers' method (the corresponding process is given in the ESI). To better perform the reduction reaction between Li and GO film, the surface of Li metal foil was first polished and then was melted at 300 °C on a copper foil in a pure argon-filled glovebox. After that, the edge of the GO film was slightly dipped in the molten Li. Then, the GO film was rapidly transformed into the rGO film by an instantaneous reduction reaction and was further infused by the molten Li. Finally, the rGO/Li composite film was obtained.
x% SiO2–LiI-GPE preparation
4 g Solution A (1 M LiTFSI and 0.05 M LiI in TEGDME), 5 g Solution B (1 g PVDF–HFP/4 g NMP) and 3.01 g Solution C (0.01 g HMPP in 3 g TMPET) were mixed well to form the precursor solution. Then, SiO2 nanoparticles were prepared through a modified Stöber method (the corresponding synthesis procedure is given in the ESI). After that, various mass ratios (0, 2, 4, 6, and 8 wt%) of SiO2 nanoparticles were added to the above precursor solution. Finally, the solidified gel electrolyte was achieved after the above mixed solution was irradiated with UV light (wavelength of 365 nm) for 20–50 s. The obtained gel electrolyte can be denoted as x% SiO2–LiI-GPE. The preparation of the flexible rGO-based cathode and characterization instrumentation are given in the ESI.
Electrochemical measurements
Assembly of the flexible Li–air batteries and electrochemical measurements
First, the rGO/Li film (1.0 × 5.0 cm2) was coated with a layer of the 4% SiO2–LiI-GPE (1.1 × 5.1 cm2). Then, the rGO-based cathode (1.0 × 5.0 cm2) (the mass loading of the active material in the carbon textiles for the flexible Li–air batteries is 0.8–1.0 mg cm−2) was further wrapped on the other side of the 4% SiO2–LiI-GPE in a glovebox filled with pure argon. The rGO/Li anode/4% SiO2–LiI-GPE/rGO-based cathode full battery was finally assembled by heat sealing technology. A LAND cycler (Wuhan Land Electronic Co. Ltd) was employed for electrochemical tests.
