Experimental
Materials
PVP (Mw 25 000) was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich Co. Ltd. 1-Bromopentadecane (98%) and tetrabutylammonium bromide (TBAB) (98%) were bought from Tokyo Chemical Industry Co. Ltd. BHMC (98%) and methanesulfonic acid (99%) were obtained from J&amp;K Scientific Ltd. 1,6-Dibromohexane (97%), trimethylamine solution (30% in water), cesium carbonate (CsCO3) (AR) (99%), and dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) (AR) were purchased from Aladdin Chemistry Co., Ltd. All other chemicals were supplied from Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co. Ltd. and used without further treatment.
Synthesis of (6-bromohexyl)trimethylammonium bromide (Br-QA)
The route for the synthesis of Br-QA was taken from the literature29 with some modifications, as shown in Scheme 1. A trimethylamine solution (80 mL) was continuously heated at a certain temperature to introduce trimethylamine gas into a solution of 1,6-dibromohexane (40 mL) and THF (100 mL) under stirring for 4 h. Then, the solution was stirred for another 24 h to precipitate a white solid, followed by filtration and washing with THF several times. The final product was collected by vacuum drying at room temperature (RT).
Route for the synthesis of Br-QA and QAPVP.
Synthesis of quaternized poly(4-vinylphenol) containing an alkyl side chain (QAPVP)
The synthesis route of QAPVP is shown in Scheme 1. As an example, 4.000 g of PVP (33.29 mmol), 17.08 g of CsCO3 (49.94 mmol), and 60 mL of DMSO were added into a 100 mL round-bottomed flask equipped with a magnetic stirrer. The reaction mixture was stirred at 40 °C overnight, and then a mixture of Br-QA (26.63 mmol, 8.072 g) and TBAB (1.663 mmol, 1.772 g) was added into the flask. After heating at 100 °C for 24 h, 2.425 g of BPA (6.658 mmol) was added into the reaction mixture, which was continuously stirred for another 24 h. The resulting mixture was carefully poured into acetone with stirring to precipitate the brown solid crude product, followed by washing with acetone and water several times. The final product was collected by vacuum drying at 80 °C for 24 h. The molar ratio of Br-QA to PVP and BPA to PVP was 0.75 and 0.25, respectively, as calculated from 1H NMR.
Membrane preparation
The preparation procedure of the QAPVP-x membranes is shown in Scheme S1, where x is the degree of crosslinking. Before casting the membranes, QAPVP and BHMC were dissolved separately in DMSO with a concentration of 5% (m/v). The BHMC content was varied to obtain membranes with different degrees of crosslinking, as detailed in Table S1. Taking the preparation of the QAPVP-5% membrane as a typical example, a mixture was obtained by mixing 4 mL of a QAPVP solution with 0.1 mL of a BHMC solution. After filtrating through a 0.45 μm PTFE syringe filter, a drop of methanesulfonic acid was added into the solution, followed by ultrasonically dispersing for 1 h. Then the solution was cast onto a glass plate, followed by drying at 80 °C for 12 h and 120 °C for 12 h to form the membranes. The membrane was peeled off from the plate and immersed in a 1 M KOH solution for 48 h to obtain the membrane in OH− form. Before further measurements, the membrane was rinsed with deionized (DI) water and then immersed in DI water for 24 h to remove the residual OH−.
Characterization
Structure and morphology characterization
1H NMR spectra were collected on an Avance III 500 M spectrometer (Bruker, Switzerland) to identify the polymer structure using DMSO-d6 as the solvent and tetramethylsilane as the internal standard. The intra/intermolecular interaction of the polymers in solution was investigated via 2D 1H–1H Overhauser effect spectroscopy (NOSEY) under a three-pulse sequence and a mixing time of 800 ms. 13C NMR characterizations were conducted on an Avance 400 M spectrometer (Bruker, Switzerland). Small-angle X-ray scattering (SAXS) curves were obtained on a SAXSee-MC2 X-ray diffractometer (Anton Paar, Austria) under vacuum at RT. To observe the morphology of the membranes, transmission electron microscopy (TEM) characterization was carried out on a JEM-2100 electron microscope (JEOL, Japan) operated at 200 kV. Before the collection of the membranes on copper grids for recording the TEM image, the membranes were first immersed in a 1 M aqueous Na2WO4 solution at RT for 48 h to stain the membranes with tungstate ions. Then the membranes were washed with DI water repeatedly and dried under vacuum at 60 °C for 24 h, followed by embedding in epoxy resin (SPI-Pon™ 812) and sectioning to 100 nm thickness with a microtome.
Ionic exchange capacity (IEC)
The back-titration method was used to measure the IEC of the membranes in OH− form. Before measurement, the weight of the membrane in the dry state was measured. After the membrane sample was immersed in a 0.1 M aqueous HCl solution for 48 h to exchange the OH− into Cl−, the solution was back-titrated with a 0.1 M aqueous NaOH solution using phenolphthalein as the indicator. The IEC of the membranes was calculated bywhere VHCl and VNaOH are the volumes of the aqueous HCl and NaOH solutions consumed in the titration, and Mdry is the weight of the dry membrane.
Water uptake (WU) and swelling ratio (SR)
The WU and SR were determined by the difference in the weight and length between the dry and wet membranes at certain temperature (30 °C, 60 °C, and 80 °C). Before the tests, the membranes were cut into rectangles, and dried under a vacuum at 100 °C for 12 h, followed by immersing in DI water for 12 h. Then the membranes were wiped quickly with a tissue, and the weight and length were measured. The WU of the membranes could be calculated bywhere Mwet and Mdry are the weight of the membranes in the wet and dry states, respectively.
The SR of the membranes was calculated by the following equationwhere Lwet and Ldry are the lengths of the membranes in the dry and wet states, respectively.
The hydration number (λ), which stands for the number of the absorbed water molecules around each ionic group, could be determined by
Gel fraction
The completeness of the crosslinking reaction is reflected by the gel fraction. The membranes were cut into rectangles with a test area of 1 cm × 5 cm, followed by immersing in 50 mL of DMSO at 80 °C for 24 h. The gel fraction was equal to the weight ratio of the dried membranes taken out of DMSO to the original membranes.
Ionic conductivity
The impedance of the membrane was obtained by means of measuring the alternating current (AC) impedance spectroscopy on a Versa STAT 4 electrochemical workstation (AMETEK). After being immersed in water for at least 24 h, the membrane strips were cramped between two pairs of electrodes and kept in a fully hydrated condition by immersing in degassed DI water during the test. The ionic conductivity (σ, mS cm−1) of the membranes was obtained as followswhere L is the distance between the electrodes (cm), A is the cross-sectional area of the membrane strips (cm2), and R is the impedance of the membranes obtained in the test (kΩ).
Degree of crosslinking (DC)
The DC of the membranes changes with the amount of the BHMC, hence the DC was determined by the feeding ratio of QAPVP to BHMC. The DC could be calculated bywhere nc is the mole of BHMC used as the crosslinker and np is the mole of the QAPVP.
Mechanical property and thermal stability
The mechanical property measurement of the wet membranes was conducted using an Instron 3343 machine with a stretching rate of 0.2 mm min−1. Before the measurement, the membranes were clipped into a dumbbell shape with an effective test area of 20 × 2 mm2 and kept in DI water for 24 h.
A thermogravimetric analyzer (TG-209F1, Germany) was employed to characterize the thermal stability of the membranes with the test temperature ranging from 35 °C to 800 °C. Prior to the tests, the membranes were dried under vacuum at 100 °C for 24 h to evaporate the residue water and solvent.
Alkaline stability
The alkaline stability of the membranes was characterized by observing the change in the ionic conductivity. The membrane samples were soaked in a 2 M KOH solution at 80 °C, picked out at a certain time and washed with DI water, and immersed in DI water for at least 2 days before measuring their conductivity.
Membrane electrode assembly and single-cell performance
The membrane electrode assembly (MEA) was fabricated by sandwiching a catalyst-loaded membrane between two sheets of carbon paper used as the anode/cathode electrodes and diffusion layer. The catalyst ink loaded in the membrane was a mixture of Pt/C catalyst (40 wt%, Johnson Matthey), a 5 wt% ionomer solution, DI water, and ethanol. For the sake of getting a well-dispersed catalyst ink, it was kept stirring for 24 h and then kept under ultrasonic vibration for 30 min. The obtained catalyst ink was sprayed on both sides of the membrane with an effective area of 4 cm2 by a hand spray pistol (Anest Iwata HP-CH, Japan), and the catalyst loading was about 0.5 mg cm−2. The test was conducted on a fuel cell test system (Kunshan Sunlaite, China) at 60 °C with fully humidified H2 and O2 gases.
