Conclusions
This work presents significant advances in several key areas of work relevant to solid-state batteries. First, a new ALD process was developed for fabrication of conformal thin films of the amorphous solid electrolyte lithium borate-carbonate, or LBCO. The degree of Li2CO3 incorporation can be tuned by adjusting deposition temperature, which enables control over ionic transport properties. The role of carbon in increasing the conductivity has been elucidated both by first principles calculations and experiments. Increased Li2CO3 content increases the ionic mobility of the Li and O in the structure, increasing diffusivity (and ionic conductivity). The films can be grown on high-aspect-ratio 3D structures with excellent uniformity, opening the door to 3D architectures for thin film batteries.
Second, these films exhibited significantly higher ionic conductivity than any previously reported ALD film, while remaining electrical insulators even in very thin films (&lt;100 nm). Ionic conductivities up to 2.23 × 10−6 S cm−1 at 298 K were attained, making this material comparable or even superior to sputtered LiPON in terms of ionic transport. This high conductivity coupled with the ability to fabricate cells with &lt;100 nm thick electrolytes means that ASR values of &lt;5 Ω cm2 can be achieved.
Third, the LBCO films were shown to be stable against anode and cathode materials, and proof of concept devices were fabricated that demonstrate the potential of this material for thin film battery manufacturing. The ionic transport number of the film remained ≈1 from 0–6 volts, and the impedance behavior was stable against a Li metal electrode. In full cells containing Li metal anodes, the ionic conductivity remained high, and excellent cycling stability was observed. The use of computational modelling in this work shows that the wide band gap and stability window in addition to a high diffusivity were indicators of a promising material for application as an electrolyte or interfacial layer. This approach could be used more generally to rapidly screen other material systems to identify promising materials to explore experimentally.
These advances have implications not only for thin-film batteries, as demonstrated here, but could be relevant in next-generation bulk solid-state batteries as interfacial layers and/or protective coatings. The ability to conformally coat a material with high ionic conductivity and good electrochemical stability could enable new approaches, architectures, and manufacturing strategies for high performance solid-state batteries.
