Conclusion
In summary, we have demonstrated a facile strategy to construct highly conductive and alkaline stable semi-interpenetrating network anion exchange membranes (semi-IPN AEMs) for alkaline fuel cell application. Miscible polystyrene and poly(2,6-dimethyl-1,4-phenylene oxide) were introduced into the semi-interpenetrating network, where linear quaternized polystyrene (CM-PS) copolymers were designed as a conductive phase, and crosslinked PPO networks were synthesized by the azide–alkyne cycloaddition reaction between PPO-N3 and stoichiometric diyne using an organic base as a catalyst. The presence of hydrophobic crosslinked PPO networks can effectively restrict the dimensional swelling of the AEMs in water and maintain the mechanical strength even at high IECs. The sIPN-62/30 AEM with an IEC of 1.44 meq. g−1 showed the highest hydroxide conductivity of 37.2 mS cm−1 at 20 °C, which was much higher than that of a control sample with similar IEC values prepared by physical blending (14.8 mS cm−1 at 20 °C). The enhancement of conductivity in the semi-IPN AEMs may be attributed to their high water uptake and “clicked” 1,2,3-triazole groups in the semi-IPN AEMs. Further increasing the IEC values by increasing the mass fraction of CM-PS copolymers led to a decrease of hydroxide conductivity owing to their excessive water uptake. Moreover, the sIPN-62/30 AEM showed excellent alkaline stability with 59.1% and 76.4% retention in hydroxide conductivity and IEC values respectively after 700 h testing in 1 M NaOH at 80 °C. Fuel cell testing of the sIPN-62/30 AEM showed that a high peak power density of 110.6 mW cm−2 was realized at a current density of 280 mA cm−2. Moreover, more than 20% of the initial performance was retained after 30 h long-term fuel cell testing at 100 mA cm−2. The measurement of ionic conductivity and IEC values of the aged AEM under fuel cell operation indicated the excellent stability of the semi-IPN AEMs under fuel cell conditions. And further optimization of MEA fabrication and the testing conditions of fuel cells is on-going in our lab to increase the durability of fuel cells.
