Experimental
Materials
3,4-Ethylenedioxythiophene (EDOT, 99.9%) monomer was purchased from Bohong Electronic Chemicals Co., Ltd, China. The anionic surfactant sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS), the oxidant iron(iii) chloride anhydrous (FeCl3) and cyclohexane poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA) were purchased from Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd, China. Dopamine hydrochloride was purchased from J&amp;K Scientific. All the reagents were used directly without further purification.
Preparation of PEDOT NWs
PEDOT NWs were synthesized by a self-assembled micellar soft-template approach modified from that reported in ref. 52 and 53. The typical procedure was as follows: 30 mmol SDS was dissolved in 100 mL deionized (DI) water, then 15 mmol FeCl3 was added into the solution and the mixture was kept stirring in an oil bath at 50 °C. After 2 h, 750 μL EDOT monomer was slowly injected into the solution and the polymerization was carried out at 50 °C. The solution was naturally cooled down in the oil bath overnight. Finally, the black product was washed with DI water and methanol several times.
Preparation of the free-standing and highly conductive PEDOT NW films
The as-prepared dark-blue products were ultrasonically dispersed in methanol with a concentration of about 0.45 mg mL−1. The films were prepared by vacuum-assisted filtration of different volumes (60, 80, 120 and 140 mL) of the dispersion onto a porous PVDF membrane. Then, the films were dried at 60 °C in a vacuum for 12 h. Finally, the as-prepared PEDOT NW films were peeled off from the PVDF membrane and cut into small strips. The films were labeled 60-PEDOT, 80-PEDOT, 120-PEDOT and 140-PEDOT, respectively, corresponding to the volume of the dispersion filtered. For comparison, we also synthesized PEDOT NWs by the same method as reported in ref. 52 and 53 (see ESI) with 80 mL of the dispersion, and the corresponding PEDOT film obtained was named NM-80-PEDOT (NM: not modified).
Preparation of the polydopamine redox-mediated electrolyte
The polymerization of dopamine hydrochloride was conducted according to ref. 51. A typical process is described as follows. A certain amount of dopamine hydrochloride was dissolved in 50 mL 1 M H2SO4 to obtain 0.05, 0.08 and 0.10 M dopamine solutions, respectively. For the electrochemical polymerization of dopamine, a three electrode system was used for performing the CV test at a scan rate of 1000 mV s−1 for 36 h in the range of −1∼1 V (Ag/AgCl as the reference electrode, and 60-PEDOT as the working and counter electrode) until the dopamine solution was transformed from transparent into yellowish-brown. The as-prepared yellowish-brown solutions were labeled PD0.05, PD0.08 and PD0.10, respectively, corresponding to the different concentrations of dopamine solution used.
Fabrication of flexible all-solid-state SCs
A PVA–H2SO4–polydopamine gel electrolyte was prepared by adding 1 g PVA into 10 mL PD0.08 at 80 °C. Then, the gel was cooled down in a fume hood. Subsequently, two pieces of the free-standing and highly conductive PEDOT NW films (2 cm × 3 cm) were immersed into the above gel electrolyte for 30 min, and then a SC device was assembled by sandwiching a PVA–H2SO4–polydopamine membrane between the two films. Finally, the as-prepared SC was put in a fume hood for solidification of the electrolyte.
Characterization
Electrical conductivity was measured using a steady-state four-probe technique with a square wave current (10 mA in amplitude) using an Ecopia HMS-3000. The PEDOT NW film and polydopamine were examined by X-ray diffraction (XRD, Bruker D8 Advance) using Cu Kα (λ = 1.5406 Å) radiation and by Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR) spectroscopy on an EQUINOX 55 FTIR spectrometer. The UV-vis-NIR absorption spectra of the films were taken with a Shimadzu UV-2501PC UV-vis-NIR spectrometer. The morphology and microstructure of the samples were observed by field-emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM) (Nova NanoSEM 450) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) (JEM-2100F). The sample for TEM observation was prepared by dispersing a small amount of the PEDOT NWs in ethanol and ultrasonicated for 10 min before being dropped on a microgrid copper net. The mechanical properties of the PEDOT NW film were tested by a method reported in ref. 54. The 140-PEDOT film was cut into strips (1 cm × 2 cm). An electromechanical universal testing machine (CMT6103) with a constant speed of 1 mm min−1 and a gauge length of 19 mm was employed to evaluate the tensile stress vs. strain under room temperature.
Electrochemical measurements
Electrochemical performances were measured at room temperature on an electrochemical workstation (CS2350H). In a three-electrode system, a Ag/AgCl electrode and Pt foil were used as the reference and counter electrode, and free-standing PEDOT NW film served as the working electrode in a 1 M H2SO4 or a polydopamine redox-mediated electrolyte. The area specific capacitance of the electrode materials was calculated by the galvanostatic charge–discharge curve (GCD) method via the following equation:1Cs = I × Δt/(ΔV × S),where I, Δt, ΔV and S denote the discharge current (A), discharge time (s), potential window subtracting IR and practical active area, respectively. In addition, the area energy density and power density are calculated by the following equations:2E = CsΔV2/7200,3P = 3600E/Δt,where E is the specific energy density, Cs is the specific capacitance of the device, P is the specific power density obtained from the GCD curve, and Δt is the discharge time.6,13
Leakage current and self-discharging behaviors were measured after charging the SC or electrodes to the respective potential window at 1 mA cm−2. Leakage current was measured by chronoamperometry during the potential holding step. Self-discharging behaviors were determined by measuring the time taken for the open circuit voltage to drop.
