Experimental section
Characterization
A QUANTA FEG 250 thermal field emission scanning electron microscopy (SEM, FEI Co., USA) equipped with a X-MAX50 energy dispersive spectrometer (Oxford, UK) was used to investigate the morphology and element distribution of the as-prepared samples. The contact angles of water droplets on the material surfaces were measured employing a contact angle system (OCA40, Dataphysics). XRD profiles were measured with a D8 advance diffractometer system equipped with Cu Kα radiation (Bruker Co., Germany). Infrared spectroscopy (IR) was obtained on an FT-IR Spectrum RX (Perkin-Elmer Spectoment) instrument. The ECL images were recorded with a UVP gel imaging system (BioSpectrum 810). The horizontal sheet resistance and vertical electrical resistance of the prepared materials were measured by a M-3 mini type four-probe tester (Suzhou Jingge Electronic Co., Ltd., China) and true RMS multimeter (Agilent U1251B), respectively. All the designed patterns for the paper device were printed by a commercial wax printer (Xerox ColorQube 8580, United States).
Design and fabrication of flexible self-charging/recharging power paper
After considering the substantial attractive features of cellulose,27–30 Whatman chromatography paper with a thickness of 180 μm, made of randomly interconnected cellulose fibers, was utilized as the substrate to construct a flexible power device. Prior to operation, the overall layout of the power device (Fig. S1, ESI) was carefully designed with Adobe Illustrator CS4 and printed by a commercial wax printer with a standard print speed up to 30 pages per minute on A4 size chromatography paper. Subsequently, well-circumscribed microfluidic units were realized by placing the wax-printed papers in an oven at 130 °C for 150 s to melt the printed wax. In this process, the melted wax could penetrate through the porous paper to form hydrophobic and insulating patterns (colored region in Fig. S1 and S2, ESI).
To construct a flexible self-charging/recharging energy device with a higher output potential, Prussian blue (PB) and magnesium metal were applied as cathode and anode, respectively, as illustrated in Fig. 1a. We chose magnesium metal as the anode because it is free from inherent poor stability and safety compared to alkali metallic lithium and sodium, which are usually utilized in lithium-ion and sodium-ion batteries, respectively. In terms of the cathode, a unique three-dimensional (3D) electrochemical system featuring a distinct electrofluidic channel was built to obtain the PB film, in which gold conductive networks were constructed with a bottom-up growth approach as reported previously.31,32 Primarily, a certain amount (depending on the area of the hydrophilic region) of AuNPs seeds solution (the preparation process is described in detail in the ESI) was dropped into the restricted area on various tabs, respectively. After the corresponding region was dried, the seed solution was dropped again and repeated four times to immobilize more seeds. The treated zones were rinsed with ultrapure water, followed by the addition of freshly prepared nutrient solution composed of 200 mM hydroxylamine hydrochloride and 1 wt% HAuCl4, and incubated for 50 min at ambient temperature. The obtained product was thoroughly rinsed with ultrapure water and dried at room temperature for 30 min. To solve the annoying issue of poor vertical electrical conductivity, the same amount of as-prepared AuNPs seeds solution was added dropwise into the restricted zone on the back side of the paper, and the above steps repeated. Finally, a multi-dimensional porous gold working electrode (PGWE) and a gold conductive track (PGCT) with both excellent horizontal and vertical conductivity were fabricated by such a double bottom-up growth method. Subsequently, a second layer of the wax pattern was established at the joint between the circular working electrode and linear wire, and again melted via applying the same procedure as above, to create a pattern of purely hydrophobic electronic structures (red dotted area in Fig. S2, ESI). We refer to the as-prepared functional component as hydrophobic gold wire.
Overview of the paper microfluidic platform. (a) Schematic illustrations of the principle for self-charging/recharging power paper, (b) schematic side view diagram of the assembly and operation of the prepared paper microfluidic platform for the electropolymerization of PB film. RE: reference electrode, CE: counter electrode. The various colors are from the different colors of the waxes used as paper hydrophobization and insulation agents to distinguish different zones of the paper device.
Benefiting from the porous structure and specific architecture of the well-designed 3D paper-based platform,14 PB film, as thick as one paper, was achieved on a cathode tab by electropolymerization in a mixture of K3[Fe(CN)6] and FeCl3 as the electrolyte (Fig. S3 and S4, ESI). During this process, a constant potential of 0.4 V from an electrochemical workstation was employed as the power supply (details can be found in the ESI). Meanwhile, PGWE achieved by a double bottom-up growth method, screen-printed carbon counter electrode and Ag/AgCl reference electrode were utilized to construct a three-electrode system, as described in Fig. 1b. Prior to the fabrication of the self-charging/recharging power paper, a punch plier purchased from a local store was used to cut filter paper into circle-shaped pieces to place the Mg sheet (5 mm in diameter, Fig. S5, ESI) on. Following addition of a strong oxidant solution composed of 0.02 M NaClO, 1.0 M KCl, and 0.1 M phosphate buffer (pH 6.0) to the electrolyte tab (Fig. 1a), oxidizing the colorless Prussian white (PW) to PB within a few minutes, the fast self-charging of the Mg/PB battery was realized. The charging and discharging process of the power paper was achieved by disconnecting and connecting PB and Mg electrodes. It should be pointed out that the Mg sheet should be polished before each measurement.
Self-powered electropolymerization of PPy and PANI
Polymerization of the PPy film was performed in an aqueous solution containing 0.15 M pyrrole with 0.2 M supporting electrolyte of NaCl, Na2SO4, and sodium p-toluenesulfonate. The electrodeposition occurred in the fabricated self-powered integrated paper microfluidic platform employing the as-prepared PGWE as the working electrode. For the synthesis of the PANI network, a freshly mixed solution of 0.05 M aniline and 0.5 M H2SO4 was used as the polymerization electrolyte.
