2.Experimental procedure
2.1Preparation
Aniline hydrochloride (2.59 g) was dissolved in 48 mL of 5 wt% aqueous solution of PVAL (Sigma-Aldrich, molecular weight 61 000). Ammonium peroxydisulfate (5.71 g) was separately dissolved in 48 mL of the same solution. Both solutions were mixed, sucked into polyethylene syringes, frozen in a solid carbon dioxide suspension in ethanol at −78 °C, transferred to a freezer operating at −24 °C, and aniline was left to polymerize for 7 days. The concentrations of the reactants thus were ca. 0.2 M aniline hydrochloride, 0.25 M ammonium peroxydisulfate, and 5 wt% PVAL. The originally white content turned to dark green/black as PANI was produced at 2 wt% concentration. The cryogel was extracted from the syringes after thawing, left in water to remove the residual reactants and low-molecular-weight by-products.
The PANI/PVAL aerogel was obtained after freeze-drying the cryogel and contained 58 wt% PANI hydrochloride and 71 wt% PVAL. The aerogel in a ceramic crucible was placed into an electric oven and heated in a stream of nitrogen up to the target temperature. The power was then switched off and the sample was left to cool still in the inert atmosphere.
2.2Characterization
Electrical characterization was performed on the samples cut into 8–10 mm long cylinders with a diameter ca. 10 mm placed between the gold-plated brass electrodes of a ZGS active sample holder and held in a BDS1100 cryostat (Novocontrol Technologies, Germany) in an air or nitrogen environment, respectively. For the investigation of the dependence of conductivity on relative humidity (R.H.) the samples were kept in a closed chamber filled with silica gel or saturated salt solutions: LiCl for R.H. = 15% and NaNO3 for R.H. = 66%. The relative humidity was measured using a TESTO 635 temperature and moisture meter (Testo, Inc., Germany) equipped with a humidity/temperature probe (accuracy ±2%). The impedance was measured in the frequency range of 0.1 Hz to 10 MHz using an Alpha A high-performance frequency analyser in a nitrogen atmosphere at room temperature. Alternatively, the DC conductivity was determined on compressed pellets prepared under a pressure of 530 MPa using the van der Pauw method.
Electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) experiments were performed at room temperature using a Bruker ELEXSYS E-540 X-band spectrometer at a microwave power output of 6 mW and 100 kHz magnetic modulation of amplitudes 0.1–1.0 G. Due to the high conductivity of the samples, they were conducted on small aerogel samples (1–3 mg) in a quartz tube of outer diameter 3 mm.
Specific surface areas of the samples dried at 120 °C for two hours were determined from argon adsorption curves at 77 K by the BET method on a home-made glass volumetric apparatus. Characterization of the internal pore structure of dry samples was performed with a Pascal 140 and 440 mercury porosimeter (Thermo Finnigan, Rodano, Italy), operating in two pressure intervals, 0–400 kPa and 1–400 MPa, allowing for the determination of the pore size in the range of 0.004–116 μm. The pore volume and most frequent pore diameter were calculated using the Pascal program by means of the Washburn equation using a cylindrical pore model. The volume of the pores was evaluated as the difference between the end values on the volume/pressure curve. The porosity was calculated as p = (V × 100)/(V + 1/ρ) (%), where V is the cumulative pore volume and ρ the sample density.
The morphologies of the prepared materials were assessed by scanning electron microscopy using a JEOL 6400 microscope. Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) was carried out in air or in a nitrogen atmosphere at 50 cm3 min−1 gas flow at a heating rate of 10 °C min−1 to 800 °C with a Pyris 1 Thermogravimetric Analyzer (Perkin-Elmer, USA).
Raman spectra of the aerogels were recorded with a Renishaw inVia reflex Raman microspectrometer using a HeNe 633 nm laser. The scattered light was registered with a Peltier-cooled CCD detector (576 × 384 pixels) and analyzed using a spectrograph with a holographic grating of 1800 lines mm−1.
2.3Electrochemical measurements
Electrochemical measurements of the PANI/PVAL aerogel after exposure to various temperatures were carried out at room temperature using a Gamry PCI4/750 potentiostat–galvanostat (Gamry, USA). A conventional one compartment three-electrode electrochemical cell was used with a saturated calomel electrode (SCE) and a large platinum plate as the reference and counter electrodes, respectively. Chemicals used in this study were of analytical purity grade purchased from Sigma-Aldrich and were used without further purification. The working electrode was a glassy carbon (GC) disk electrode with a base surface area of 0.196 cm2 mounted to a Pine rotator.
The electrodes for electrochemical measurements were prepared using the thin film approach, as described below. For the electrochemical measurement, 4.50 mg of PANI/PVAL aerogel exposed to various temperatures were mixed with 0.50 mg Vulcan XC-72 carbon black (Cabot, USA, 50 nm spherical particles) and suspended in 1.0 mL of water–ethanol (3 : 2 by vol) using an ultrasonic bath. During sonication, 10 μL of 5 wt% solution of Nafion ionomer in ethanol was added to the suspension. Then, 5 μL of the suspension was transferred onto the GC disk and the solvent was evaporated under a nitrogen stream. Vulcan XC-72 was added to serve as a current collector, while Nafion ensured attachment of the sample layer to the GC surface, which is necessary for good electrical contact.33 The electrodes prepared by this method were transferred to the electrochemical cell containing a nitrogen-purged electrolyte (1 M H2SO4, 2 M KNO3 or 6 M KOH) and subjected to cyclic voltammetry measurements to assess their capacitive behavior.
Gravimetric capacitances were calculated from the results of cyclic voltammetry measurements. Integration of current vs. time for the discharge scan provided the amount of the stored charge which was then used to estimate the gravimetric capacitance (C, in F g−1) according to the formula:where I is the discharge current, ΔV is the difference between the starting (V1) and end potential (V2); m is the mass of the active material on the electrode. Galvanostatic charge/discharge tests were performed in a three electrode system and the capacitances were calculated as:where Δt is the discharge time. For this set of measurements, 50 μg of the active material was loaded on a GC disk electrode. The stability under cycling conditions was tested in a two electrode system using symmetric capacitor architecture. On each electrode 0.5 mg of the active material was loaded and subjected to extensive cycling. These measurements have been carried out with an Arbin BT-2042 test station.
