Experimental
Preparation of UV-cured SPEs
Considering that all the materials are sensitive to moisture and oxygen, all the experiments were conducted in a glove box (H2O and O2 content &lt;0.5 ppm) under an argon atmosphere. Scheme 1 shows the route used for the synthesis of the target polymers via solvent-free copolymerization. Firstly, LiTFSI (99.95% purity, Aladdin) was dissolved in a mixture of PEGDMA (Mw = 950, Sigma-Aldrich) and PEGDA (Mw = 1000, Sigma-Aldrich), followed by uniform stirring at room temperature. Then, PETMP (Sigma-Aldrich) and 2 wt% 2,2-dimethoxy-2-phenylacetophenone (DMPA as a photoinitiator, Aladdin) were added to the abovementioned solution sequentially. A homogeneous mixture was obtained after stirring for a few hours. Afterwards, the solution was cast onto a Teflon plate and exposed to a UV lamp (Shanghai Morvel Biotechnology Co., Ltd.) at a wavelength of 365 nm with an intensity of 5 mW cm−2 in an argon atmosphere in a glove box. To ensure that the precursor was converted into the target polymer to a great extent, the UV-cured membrane was photopolymerized by exposure of the front and back to a UV lamp five times every 10 min. Finally, the polymer electrolyte was synthesized by a solvent-free copolymerization method. A series of SPEs were obtained by adjusting the molecular weights of PEGDMA and PEGDA. The prepared SPEs comprising PEGDMA(Mw=950)-co-PEGDA(Mw=1000), PEGDMA(Mw=950)-co-PEGDA(Mw=600), PEGDMA(Mw=480)-co-PEGDA(Mw=1000) and PEGDMA(Mw=480)-co-PEGDA(Mw=600) are abbreviated as SPE-1, SPE-2, SPE-3 and SPE-4, respectively.
Fabrication of solid-state lithium batteries
Monopolar cell
Scheme 2a shows the fabrication process of the all-solid-state monopolar cell, which included the preparation of an LiFePO4 (LFP) cathode integrated with SPE-1, as well as the assembly of LMBs. Initially, a cathode slurry comprising 70 wt% LFP, 10 wt% Super-P and 20 wt% SPE-1 in acetonitrile was loaded directly onto Al foil by casting with a doctor blade after magnetic stirring for 24 h. It should be noted that the whole procedure had to be performed in a dark place. Afterwards, the homogeneous precursor mixture of SPE-1 was coated on the cathode surface by tape-casting and the precursor was allowed to permeate into the cathode layer to fill the voids between LFP particles, as illustrated by SEM (Scheme 2b). Then, UV polymerization was carried out to integrate the LFP cathode with the SPE-1 layer. As Scheme 2b shows, the integrated LFP/SPE exhibited close interfacial contact, which is beneficial for decreasing the interfacial resistance. Finally, Li foil was pressed onto the LFP-SPE layer to assemble CR2032 coin cells for testing.
(a) Procedure of integrating LFP cathode layer with SPE-1 layer and assembling a battery, as well as its schematic structure; (b) SEM image of LFP integrated with SPE and relevant EDS elemental maps of sulfur, phosphorus, and iron.
Bipolar cell
The all-solid-state bipolar cell, including the preparation of a cathode integrated with SPE and packing together and assembly as a soft package, is illustrated in Scheme 3. Initially, two monopolar cells were assembled as described in the previous section. Then a bipolar cell was packed by connecting the two monopolar cells in series, in which stainless steel (SS) was introduced as an intermediate layer, considering the unstable interface between Al foil and the lithium electrode.
SEM image of inner structure of bipolar cell and relevant EDS elemental maps of sulfur, phosphorus, iron, and aluminum.
Characterization and instruments
Structural characterization of the precursor and SPE was conducted by Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FT-IR, Nicolet 6700 spectrometer) over the range of 4000–500 cm−1 at room temperature. Besides, the thermal properties of the prepared polymer membranes were characterized by differential scanning calorimetry (DSC, PerkinElmer Diamond DSC) and thermogravimetric analysis (TGA, PerkinElmer). Specifically, DSC and TGA were performed to determine the Tg and thermal stability of the SPEs, respectively. Moreover, the morphology of the SPEs was confirmed using field emission scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM, S-4800).
All the electrochemical properties were analysed using a Solartron 1470E multi-channel potentiostat electrochemical workstation. Ionic conductivities were determined by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) with a perturbation amplitude of 10 mV from 106 Hz to 10 Hz over the temperature range from 30 °C to 100 °C and the assembly of symmetric coin cells by sandwiching a pair of SS blocking electrodes with diameters of 15.5 mm. The ionic conductivities were calculated from eqn (2), where L (cm) represents the thickness of the SPEs, R (Ω) is the resistance of the bulk electrolyte, and S (cm2) represents the effective area of contact between the SPEs and SS.2
The lithium-ion transference number (tLi+) of SPE-1 was determined by a combination of AC impedance and DC polarization measurements using a symmetric cell with an Li/SPE-1/Li structure and calculated by the Bruce–Vincent–Evans equation (eqn (3))3
The symmetric Li/SPE-1/Li cell was polarized at a DC voltage of 10 mV (ΔV), and its AC impedance plots were obtained over the frequency range between 10 MHz and 0.1 Hz. In the equation, I0 and Iss represent the initial and stable current, respectively, whereas R0 and Rss are the SPE/Li interfacial resistance for the symmetric cell before and after polarization, respectively.
Linear sweep voltammograms were recorded by an electrochemical workstation between 3 V and 7 V (vs. Li+/Li) at a scanning rate of 1 mV s−1, and cyclic voltammograms were recorded between −0.5 V and 2.5 V (vs. Li+/Li) at a scanning rate of 0.5 mV s−1 using a coin cell with an SS/SPE/Li configuration. Galvanostatic cycling measurements were carried out at a current density of 0.1 mA cm−2 using a symmetric coin cell with an Li/SPE/Li configuration at 60 °C to ensure prevention of the growth of lithium dendrites. All the cells were cycled by charging for 1 h and discharging for 1 h.
To evaluate the performance of the solid-state LIBs, CR2032 coin cells with monopolar LFP-SPE/Li and bipolar LFP-SPE/Li//LFP-SPE/Li structures were assembled. Charge–discharge cycling of the all-solid-state cells was performed with a Land charge/discharge instrument (Wuhan Rambo Testing Equipment Co., Ltd.). The thickness of the LFP cathode was about 25 μm, and the areal density was around 1.80 mg cm−2. The LFP//Li batteries were charged and discharged between 2.8 V and 3.8 V. The C-rate in all the electrochemical measurements was defined on the basis of 1C = 150 mA h g−1.
