2.Experimental
Synthesis of a phosphorylated graphene monolith (PGM)
Graphite oxide was prepared from graphite powder (Nanjing XFNANO Materials Tech Co., Ltd) using a modified Hummers method. A PGM was synthesized via a hydrothermal reaction at low temperature (90 °C). Typically, GO aqueous dispersion (4 mg mL−1, 20 mL) was first mixed with amino trimethylene phosphonic acid (ATMP) (0.1 g, 0.2 g, 0.5 g, 1.0 g, and 2.0 g) in a 30 mL glass vial, which was maintained at 90 °C for 24 h to obtain a phosphorylated graphene hydrogel (PGH). Then, the PGH was frozen at −20 °C for 5 h. After being thawed at room temperature, the PGH was sequentially subjected to dialysis in water for 24 h to remove soluble species. Finally, the PGM was obtained by drying the PGH in an oven at 60 °C for 24 h. The samples are denoted as PGM-x-y, where x and y represent the amount of ATMP (g) and the reaction times (hour), respectively.
Synthesis of a phosphorylated graphene film (PGF)
The as-synthesized phosphorylated graphene hydrogel was first subjected to dialysis in water for 24 h and then re-dispersed in water by ultrasonication to give an aqueous dispersion with a concentration of 2 mg mL−1. The dispersion was vacuum-filtered through membrane filters (polyether sulfone membrane, 42 mm diameter, 0.22 μm pore size) and dried at 60 °C for 24 h. The film was then peeled-off the filter, resulting in a free-standing, flexible PGF (thickness: ∼20 μm).
Characterization
The morphology of the PGM was investigated using field emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM, Nanosem 430) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM, Tecnai G2 F20) at an acceleration voltage of 200 kV. TEM samples were prepared by dropping of diluted dispersions on a carbon film. The chemical compositions of samples were determined using Fourier transform infrared (FTIR, BRUKER Vertex 70) spectroscopy in the range of 4000–500 cm−1 and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS, GENESIS, EDAX, with Al Kα radiation). The X-ray diffraction (XRD) was performed at room temperature using a RigakuD/max2500 v/Pc X-ray diffractometer (Cu Kα). The Raman spectrum was recorded using a Renishaw 1000 Raman microprobe (Renishaw, UK) with an argon ion laser (λ = 532 nm). The compression tests were performed using an electronic tensile machine (WDW-2, Yangzhou Zhongke Measuring Apparatus Co., China).
Proton conductivity of the PGM
To investigate the proton conductivity of the PGM, the hydrogen fuel cell performance tests using the PGM as the proton-exchange membrane material were carried out. Phosphorylated graphene films (PGFs) were sandwiched between two Nafion® membranes (commercial proton-conducting membrane) to make a composite membrane, denoted as Nafion–PG film–Nafion (N–PGF–N) (Fig. S6 and S7). For comparison, a composite membrane using reduced graphene oxide (rGO) films has also been fabricated, denoted as N–rGOF–N (Fig. S9). Then, the membrane electrode assembly (MEA) was fabricated by sandwiching the composite membranes (N–PGF–N and N–rGOF–N) between two gas-diffusion electrodes, which were loaded with 0.25 mg cm−2 catalyst (60% Pt/C, Johnson Matthey). The fuel cell was tested at 60 °C and 100% RH.
Mixed conductivity of the PGM
The conductivity of all samples was measured by two probe electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) using an impedance/gain-phase analyzer (PARSTAT4000) in the frequency range from 1 MHz to 0.1 Hz with a voltage amplitude of 10 mV. For the PGM, two platinum sheets were attached on both sides of the sample using conductive silver ink. Before the measurement of the conductivity of the PGM at different compressive strains, the samples were set in a thermostatic and humidistatic chamber (60 °C and 60% RH) for 12 h after each 10 cycle compression test. The electronic resistances of samples were also measured via the two-probe DC method, and the I–V curves were recorded from −0.5 V to 0.5 V at a scan rate of 0.01 V s−1. The conductivity (σ) was calculated according to the relationship: σ = L/AR, where L is the length between the platinum sheets, A is the cross-sectional area of cylindrical samples, and R is the resistance. The equivalent circuit of the PGM is shown in Fig. S11. It consists of a parallel combination of electronic resistance (Re) and protonic resistance (Rp), which is in series with a capacitance (C). In this case, the intersection of the high frequency line with the real axis corresponds to the resistance of the electronic and protonic resistance in parallel (RpRe/(Rp + Re)), and the intersection of low frequency is the electronic resistance (Re).29,30
