Experimental
Synthesis and purification of [C2epyr][FSI]
Synthesis and purification of [C2epyr][FSI] was reported in our previous publication.39The 90 mol% Li[FSI] + 10 mol% [C2epyr][FSI] sample was prepared by dissolving Li[FSI] (CoorsTek, Inc., &gt;99.5%) and [C2epyr][FSI] in acetonitrile (&gt;99.9%, Sigma-Aldrich). Acetonitrile was then removed under vacuum (0.01 mbar). Samples were dried prior to all experiments under vacuum, at ambient temperature for 24 h and then 50 °C for 24 h. Samples were then transferred to an argon glove box.
Thermal analysis
Thermal analysis was conducted by differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) using a Mettler Toledo DSC 822e or NETSCH DSC 214 Polyma instrument. Samples were enclosed in aluminium pans in an argon-filled glove box. Samples were subject to three heating cycles following a 30 min cooling period at the lowest temperature. The data shown was taken from the second heating cycle.
The ionic conductivity and the charge transfer resistance
The ionic conductivity and the charge transfer resistance were measured using a Biologic MTZ-35 impedance analyser. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) was used, where a sinusoidal wave potential of amplitude 10 mV was applied at a frequency range of 7.0 MHz to 0.1 mHz, and the current response and corresponding phase shift were measured. The data was analysed using a Nyquist impedance plot, where typical semi-circles were obtained. The first touch-down was attributed to the solution resistance (Rsol) and the diameter of the semi-circle was attributed to the resistance of the electrolyte–electrode interface (RCT).43 Samples were enclosed in a dip-cell composed of two platinum spheres immersed in a sample vial and sealed from air by a rubber ring. Samples were loaded in the dip-cell and sealed an argon-filled glove box. The conductivity of the neat [C2epyr][FSI] sample was previously reported,42 measured in a barrel cell designed for solid state samples.
Diffusion coefficients
Diffusion coefficients of 1H, 19F and 7Li were measured at different temperatures using a Bruker Avance III 300 MHz wide-bore NMR spectrometer equipped with a Diff50 diffusion probe. Pulse gradient stimulated echo was used for all the measurements. Diffusion times for 1H, 19F and 7Li were 20, 10, and 10 ms, respectively. Gradient pulse length was 5 ms, and the gradient strength was varied according to diffusion coefficients in order to cover the entire NMR signal attenuation. Recycle delay was 2 s for all nuclei and temperatures, to allow the spin magnetization to recover to equilibrium, and the gradient coil to dissipate heat. Solid-state NMR measurements were performed on a Bruker Avance III 500 MHz wide bore NMR spectrometer equipped with a 4 mm H/F-X double resonance magic angle spinning (MAS) probe. The spinning rate was 8 kHz for 1H and 19F MAS experiments. The static 1H, 19F and 7Li NMR spectra were recorded using the same probe, and the same sample, but in a stationary state. The static spectra were recorded after the spinning. RF pulse length was 4 μs for all the nuclei, and recycle delays were 10 s for 1H and 19F, and 300 s for 7Li NMR.
Lithium transference number (tLi+)
Lithium transference number (tLi+) was measured electrochemically following the Vincent–Bruce method.31 Li|Li symmetrical cells were assembled in an argon-filled glove box using CR 2032-type coin cells. The electrolyte was enclosed in a polyethylene ring used as a spacer with thickness of 0.5 mm, inner diameter of 8 mm and outer diameter of 16 mm. No separator material was used.
Lithium transference number was also estimated using the diffusion coefficients of 1H, 19F and 7Li measured by NMR. The transference number was estimated to be the ratio of the diffusion coefficient of 7Li relative to the combined diffusion coefficient of all 1H, 19F and 7Li species present.
Li|Li symmetrical cells
Li|Li symmetrical cells, described above, were cycled by a Biologic VMP3 under an applied current.
Post-mortem analysis
Post-mortem analysis of lithium metal electrodes was performed following electrolyte removal and electrode washing with dimethyl carbonate (DMC) in an argon-filled glove box. Images were taken using a JEOL JSM-IT300-LV scanning electron microscope (SEM) with an accelerating voltage of 5 kV.
Cyclic voltammetry (CV)
Cyclic voltammetry (CV) was performed using a Biologic SP-200 potentiostat and a three electrode cell in an argon-filled glove box. A platinum disk with surface area of 2.0 mm2, a lithium metal coil and a lithium metal strip were used as working, counter and reference electrode respectively. A 20 mV s−1 scan rate was used.
The average cycling efficiency (ACE)
The average cycling efficiency (ACE) was measured in the three electrode cell described above according to literature procedure;44 a known amount of lithium was deposited on the electrode surface (Qp) and a fraction of that deposit (Qc) was cycled until all the lithium initially deposited was depleted (giving a potential spike). ACE is given by 100 × NQc/(NQc + Qp), where N is the number of cycles obtained before depletion of the lithium deposit. Current values used throughout this experiment were gradually increased from 0.1 mA cm−2 to 0.5 mA cm−2, where the highest ACE was obtained at Qp = 1.0 mA h cm−2 and Qc = 0.25 mA h cm−2.
