Experimental
Materials
CNFs were prepared from microcrystalline cellulose via TEMPO-mediated oxidation according to a previous report.33 Graphene oxide nanosheets were purchased from Times Nano (China). Nafion solution (5 wt%) was purchased from Sigma. Dopamine, trimethyl aminomethane (Tris) and carboxymethylcellulose (CMC) were obtained from Aladdin Co. (China). Nafion117 membranes were bought from 3 M. H2SO4 and HCl were bought from Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co. (China). All the chemical reagents were used as received.
Preparation of nanocomposites
First, 60 mg dopamine was added into 480 mL of a 0.5 mg mL−1 GO aqueous dispersion, and the pH value was tuned to 8.5 with Tris and HCl.35 After stirring for 8 h at ambient temperature, polydopamine modified GO (PGO) nanocomposites were obtained followed by washing with deionized water. Then, 0.4 mL of a 5 wt% Nafion solution was added into 40 mL of the 0.5 mg mL−1 PGO aqueous dispersion. After 1 h of ultrasonic mixing and 2 h of standing, a Nafion-PGO (NPGO) nanocomposite dispersion was achieved.
Preparation of solid electrolytes
Typically, 5 mg CNF was added into 40 mL of a 1 mg mL−1 NPGO dispersion, and the mixture was ultrasonicated for 30 min. Then, the dispersion was vacuum filtered to form a membrane on a Whatman microfiltration membrane with a 200 nm pore diameter. Finally, the obtained membrane was acidified in 1 M H2SO4 for 1 h, followed by washing with deionized water several times. The membrane was named NPGOM-5-CNF, where 5 represents the content of CNFs. NPGOM-10-CNF, NPGOM-15-CNF, and NPGOM-10-CMC were prepared for comparison. NPGOM was prepared without adding CNFs, and PGOM was directly prepared from a PGO dispersion.
Characterization
A Zeiss Ultra 55 was used to obtain FE-SEM (field-emission scanning electron microscope) photos. AFM (atomic force microscopy) data were obtained on a Bruker Multimode 8 in QNM mode and tapping mode. A Thermofisher NEXUS 6700 was utilized to collect FTIR (Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy) spectra. TG (Thermo-gravimetry) tests were performed on a Mettler Toledo TGA 1 in a nitrogen atmosphere with a 20 °C min−1 heating rate. XRD (X-ray diffraction) spectra were achieved on a Bruker D8 ADVANCE. The CA (contact angle) values were determined using Dataphysics OCA 40 Micro. Water uptake (WU), in-plane proton conductivity (σ) and methanol permeability (P) of the membranes were acquired using the same methods as in our previous report.36 In brief, the in-plane proton conductivity (σ) of the membranes was tested on a CHI660E electrochemical workstation in four-electrode mode.36 The temperature and humidity conditions were controlled using a humidity test chamber. The methanol permeability was evaluated at 40 °C with an 80 v/v% methanol/H2O solution using the dynamic FTIR method.36 Finally, the selectivity (S) of the membranes at 40 °C was obtained from the ratio of proton conductivity at 40 °C and 40% RH and methanol permeability at 40 °C. The membrane electrode assemblies (MEAs) were prepared by hot-pressing at 4 Mpa for 5 min. The active area of MEAs was 4 cm2. The single proton-exchange membrane fuel cell (PEMFC) performances were tested at 60 °C and 100% RH, where the flux rates of H2 and O2 were controlled at 150 mL min−1.
