2.Experimental
2.1Synthesis of LLZTO powder
Bulk Li6.4La3Zr1.4Ta0.6O12 (LLZTO) was synthesized by a solid-state reaction with stoichiometric amounts of Li2CO3 (20 wt% excess, Sinopharm, AR), La2O3 (Sinopharm, AR; dried at 900 °C for 12 h), ZrO2 (Sinopharm, AR), and Ta2O5 (Aladdin, 99.99%) as starting materials. The starting materials were mixed thoroughly by planetary ball milling and then calcined at 900 °C for 6 h. The preheated powders were then ball milled and pressed into a pellet with a diameter of 30 mm under an axial pressure of 15 MPa. The pellet was then sintered at 1140 °C for 16 h with a heating rate of 3 °C min−1. The ionic conductivity of the synthesized bulk LLZTO is about 5 × 10−4 S cm−1, and the X-ray diffraction (XRD) pattern shows a phase pure cubic garnet (Fig. S1). A fine powder was prepared by crushing the bulk LLZTO powder and passing it through a 60 mesh sieve. The obtained LLZTO powder was further processed by planetary ball milling at 350 rpm for 12 h. Isopropanol was used as a solvent medium during all milling processes. The final resulting slurry was dried in a vacuum oven to remove the solvent completely.
2.2Modification of the LLZTO powder with a polydopamine coating
LLZTO particles were coated with polydopamine in a methanol solution. 72.6 mg Tris and 120 mg dopamine-HCl were dissolved in 60 mL methanol. Then 5 g LLZTO powder was added to the methanol dopamine solution under constant stirring (400 rpm). After adding LLZTO, the solution slowly turned brown. Pure oxygen gas was passed through the solution to aid in dopamine polymerization. After 16 h of continuous stirring, the coated LLZTO was filtered from the solution, washed twice with methanol, and dried overnight in a vacuum oven. After modification with polydopamine, the color of LLZTO changed from white to brown, as shown in Fig. S2. For the control experiment, non-ionically conducting ZrO2 nanosized particles were coated with polydopamine by the same method.
2.3Synthesis of composite solid-state electrolytes
Composites of PDA coated LLZTO (denoted as LLZTO@PDA) and pristine LLZTO (denoted as LLZTO) with PEO/LiTFSI were prepared by a solvent volatilization method. The ratios of materials for the composite electrolyte were n(PEO) : n(LiTFSI) = 8 : 1 and m(LLZTO) : m(PEO) = 8 : 2. LLZTO@PDA or LLZTO was ultrasonically dispersed in acetonitrile for 15 min. LiTFSI was then added and allowed to dissolve in the solution. Finally, 5 wt% PEO (Mw = 600 000) was added to the solution under constant stirring (1000 rpm). The mixture was allowed to stir for 12 h until a homogeneous slurry was formed. The homogeneous slurry was cast in a PTFE mold and placed in dry air to volatilize the solvent. Then the composite was dried in a vacuum oven at 60 °C for 24 h to ensure any residual solvent was removed. After drying, the composite electrolyte was hot pressed at 60 °C to form an electrolyte membrane, labeled LLZTO@PDA/PEO and LLZTO/PEO, respectively. In the control experiment, 80 wt% nanosized ZrO2 was mixed in 20 wt% PEO using the same experimental procedure, forming the composite electrolyte: ZrO2/PEO and ZrO2@PDA/PEO. Additionally, the polydopamine coating procedure was also applied to the LLZTO tablet. A polydopamine coated LLZTO tablet and a pristine LLZTO tablet were used to study the Li+ transporting properties through the polydopamine layer and the interaction between the polydopamine layer and lithium metal. Experimental details and results are shown in the ESI.
2.4Characterization of powders and composite solid-state electrolytes
Particle size distribution of the LLZTO powders was tested with a laser particle sizer (Mastersizer 2000). Pristine LLZTO and LLZTO@PDA, as well as the composite electrolytes LLZTO@PDA/PEO and LLZTO/PEO, were examined by powder XRD (Bruker AXS D8 Advanced with Da Vinci). LLZTO@PDA powders were studied with Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR, NETZSCH X70) and compared with pure polydopamine synthesized under the same conditions. LLZTO and LLZTO@PDA were also examined with X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS, Thermo Fisher Scientific 250XI) to acquire the elemental information. The morphology of samples was observed with scanning (SEM) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM). Thermal stability of the composite solid-state electrolyte was evaluated with TGA-DTA analysis (TA Q5000) under an argon atmosphere from 50 °C to 600 °C at a heating rate of 10 °C min−1. Additionally, LLZTO@PDA/PEO and LLZTO/PEO were heated on a hot plate to check their heat resistance and thermal stability.
2.5Electrochemical characterization of SSEs
Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS), cyclic voltammetry (CV), and linear scan voltammetry (LSV) measurements were performed with a Biologic SP300 to determine the ionic conductivity and interfacial impedance of the composite electrolytes. For EIS measurements to determine ionic conductivity, the composite electrolyte was sandwiched between two stainless steel plates in a coin cell, and the cell was sealed in a glove box filled with argon. The measurements were performed in the frequency range from 7 MHz to 1 Hz with an AC amplitude of 10 mV. The measurements were taken at every 5 °C from 80 °C to 20 °C. For interfacial impedance measurements, the composite electrolyte samples were sandwiched between two lithium metal electrodes and measured in the frequency range from 7 MHz to 100 mHz. Three-electrode CV from −0.5 V to 6 V at a scan rate of 1 mV s−1 was performed to evaluate the electrochemical stability of LLZTO@PDA against lithium metal. The working electrode for CV consisted of the LLZTO@PDA powder, super P, and PVDF (weight ratio = 8 : 1 : 1) with lithium metal serving as the reference electrode and counter electrode. The working electrode and reference electrode were kept apart with a separator and liquid electrolyte. LSV curves of LLZTO@PDA/PEO and LLZTO/PEO vs. Li were recorded from OCV to 6 V at a scan rate of 1 mV s−1 at room temperature with stainless steel as the working electrode. A symmetric lithium battery Li|SSE|Li was assembled as a coin cell and tested at a constant current density of 0.2 mA cm−2 at 50 °C to test the cycling performance of the composite electrolyte.
2.6Electrochemical characterization of LiFePO4|SSE|Li cells
Full cells with a LiFePO4 (LFP) cathode and a 100 μm lithium foil anode were fabricated for electrochemical testing. The cathode composition was LFP, PVDF, LiTFSI and super P with a weight ratio of 70 : 12 : 8 : 10. The cathode constituents were dispersed in NMP to form a uniform slurry by magnetic stirring for 12 h. The slurry was then doctor bladed onto Al foil, followed by vacuum drying at 120 °C for 8 h. After drying, the cathode sheets were then calendered to form a compact electrode. Φ 12 mm disks were cut from the cathode sheets for coin cells. The loading of LFP on the cathode electrolyte was ∼1 mg cm−2. Composite solid-state electrolyte membranes LLZTO@PDA/PEO and LLZTO/PEO were tailored for coin cell assembly as discs with a diameter of Φ 19 mm. Coin cells were assembled in an argon filled glovebox and additionally sealed with epoxy resin to ensure that there was no exposure to ambient conditions upon removal from the glovebox. The LFP|SSE|Li cells were cycled at a rate of 0.2C at 50 °C between 3.0 V and 3.9 V.
