Conclusions
Present work firstly reports that a large-sized borates group-based anion BOB− can act as a solid plasticizer to enhance ion transport in polymer solid electrolyte. A high ion conductivity has been achieved in the polymer solid electrolyte PVDF-HFP/LiBOB, which can reach 6.1 × 10−5 S cm−1 at 25 °C and 5.7 × 10−4 S cm−1 at 80 °C, well satisfying the practical requirements for PSEs. A novel GO/CNT/PSE polymer composite electrodes were developed by incorporating PSE into porous GO/CNT network to form a coupled electrical-ionic inter-percolating hybrid structure. Such electrical-ionic hybrid structures can facilitate the ion transport and the access to GO/CNT surfaces, leading to a significantly higher electrochemical performance compared with traditional porous electrodes without PSE. The GO/CNT/PSE polymer composite electrode structure can also improve the compatibility with electrodes and decrease ion transport resistance between electrolyte and electrode. The GO/CNT/PSE based solvent-free supercapacitors assembled by hot lamination show typical double layer capacitive behaviors and demonstrate excellent electrochemical performance, reaching a high specific capacitance of 267 F g−1 at 1 A g−1 and capacitance retention of over 88% after 20 000 cycles. These supercapacitors show excellent flexibility with almost zero performance degradation after 10 000 bending cycles. The electrical-ionic hybrid polymer composite electrode structure also shows the thickness-insensitive electrochemical behavior, which enables the development of high-performance solvent-free SPs with high areal mass loading of active materials. The solvent-free SPs with 100 μm-thick GO/CNT/PSE electrodes can achieve an ultrahigh areal capacitance of 590 mF cm−2 and in turn a superior energy density of 6.64 mW h cm−3 with a high power density of 0.05 W cm−3. The ultrahigh gravimetric and volumetric energy densities, low self-discharging, outstanding cyclic stability and excellent scalability render these solvent-free flexible supercapacitors very promising for practical applications.
