Experimental section
Materials
PVDF-HFP pellets (Mw = ∼40 000), LiBOB powder, anhydrous 99.8% N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF), anhydrous 99.5% N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP) and 1.0 M LiPF6 in EC/DMC (50/50, v/v) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. 1.0 M TEABF4 in PC was purchased from Shenzhen CAPCHEM Technology Co. Ltd. The GO powder was purchased from Ashine Tech Development Co., Ltd, Shanghai, China and multiwalled-CNTs with outer diameters of 8–15 nm and lengths of ∼50 μm were purchased form XFNANO Materials Tech Co., Ltd, Nanjing, China. Flexible graphite papers were purchased form Jinglong Tetan Tech Co., Ltd, Beijing, China. All materials were used without further purification.
Preparation of PVDF-HFP/LiBOB PSE
PVDF-HFP pellets were firstly dried in an oven at 100 °C for 24 h before usage. 0.3 g PVDF-HFP pellets were dissolved in DMF at a concentration of 0.1 g mL−1 in a flat bottle with rapid magnetic stirring for about 8 h at 60 °C. Next, 0.3 g LiBOB powder was added to the solution and the mixture was stirred for 12 h to form a homogeneous PSE solution in an argon atmosphere at room temperature. The resulting PSE solution was then casted on a glass Petri-dish and dried in a vacuum oven (10−3 Torr) at 80 °C for over 72 h to evaporate all the DMF solvent. Finally, free-standing PSE films (thickness: 30–100 μm) were obtained. The dried PSE films were stored in a glove box (O2 &lt; 0.1 ppm, and H2O &lt; 0.1 ppm) for future use.
Fabrication of EIPHN electrodes
GO and CNTs were firstly dried in an oven at 100 °C for 24 hours. A certain amount of GO, CNTs and as-prepared PVDF-HFP/LiBOB (0.2 g mL−1 in DMF) with a weight ratio of 1 : 4 : 1, were mixed in a flat bottom glass bottle. Then a certain amount NMP was added to the mixture to ensure the electrode to form a homogeneous slurry, followed by a rapid magnetic stirring process with a speed of 400 rpm for about 8 h to form GO/CNT/PSE slurry in an argon atmosphere. Subsequently, the produced GO/CNT/PSE slurry was deposited on a flexible graphite paper using the roll-coating method and dried at 80 °C for over 48 h in the vacuum oven (10−3 Torr) to remove the solvent and form GO/CNT/PSE electrodes. The mass loading of EIHPN electrode was 1–5 mg cm−2. For comparison, GO, CNT and GO/CNT electrodes were prepared in the same way without adding the PSE.
Fabrication of solvent-free symmetric SPs
A small amount of PVDF-HFP/LiBOB/DMF solution was spin-coated onto the EIHPN electrodes at 800–1000 rpm using a Chemat spin-coater while the substrate was heated at ∼80 °C to evaporate DMF, forming an adhesion layer with a thickness of 1–5 μm on the EIHPN surface. Next, a dried PVDF/HFP-LiBOB membrane was sandwiched between two identical EIHPN electrodes and all of them were transferred between two polyethylene (PE) based thin encapsulation layers. Finally, the solvent-free SPs were assembled and sealed by a hot lamination process at 100 °C, with the pressure around ∼5 MPa.
Characterizations
Scanning electron microscope (SEM, JEOL-7100F) was used to characterize the morphology of the materials. Thermogravimetric analysis TGA was conducted with a thermal gravimetric analyzer (UNIX/TGA7, PerkinElmer) with a heating rate of 10 °C min−1 from 25 °C to 600 °C in a nitrogen atmosphere. Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) was carried out by first increasing the temperature from 25 °C to 160 °C with a heating rate of 10 °C min−1 and subsequently decreasing the temperature down to −80 °C with a 10 °C min−1 cooling rate, followed by another heating cycle to 160 °C with the same heating rate. Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) surface area analysis was conducted with a Beckman coulter SA3100 at 77 K. The electrochemical properties of supercapacitors, cyclic voltammograms (CV) and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements were carried out with an electrochemical workstation (AutoLab PGSTAT 302N). The ion conductivity of polymer solid electrolyte was determined by EIS measurement in a frequency range from 1 MHz to 0.1 Hz using two stainless steel (SS) block electrodes (SS//PSE//SS). The ion conductivity was calculated according to the equation:1where l and A are the thickness and contact area of the polymer solid electrolyte, respectively. The bulk electrolyte resistance value Rb was determined from the intercept of the semi-circular curve with the real axis at the low-frequency region. Galvanostatic charge–discharge (GCD) measurements were conducted by Neware battery test instruments (BTS-5V-1 mA). The gravimetric specific capacitance of single GO/CNT/PSE electrode Cs (F g−1) was calculated from the GCD measurement profiles according to the equation:2where i is the discharge current, t (s) is the discharging time, m+ (g) is the mass of active materials in the positive electrode, m− (g) is the mass of active materials in the negative electrode, which doesn't include the PSE and ΔV is the working potential window of the electrode.
The gravimetric energy density Edevice (W h kg−1) of GO/CNT/PSE based solvent-free supercapacitors was calculated according to the equation:3
The gravimetric power density Pdevice (W Kg−1) of GO/CNT/PSE based solvent-free supercapacitors can be calculated according to the equation:4
The volumetric capacitance of single GO/CNT/PSE electrode, Cv,s (F cm−3), was calculated from the GCD results according to the equation:5where v+ (cm−3) and v− (cm−3) are the volumes of the positive and negative electrodes excluding the current collector. The volumetric energy density Ev,device, (W h cm−3) (based on two electrodes) of GO/CNT/PSE based solvent-free supercapacitors devices were calculated according to the equation:6
The volumetric power density Pv,device (W cm−3) of the GO/CNT/PSE based solvent-free supercapacitors was calculated according to the equation7
